Interview
The Cold War intensified polarization across the Middle East. Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser scored a victory against Western imperialist powers as he mobilized the region against the Baghdad Pact security alliance. He also turned toward the Communist block for aid, a defining act in the non-alignment movement's tightrope act he would forever be associated with.
And, perhaps most significantly, he secured a political triumph out of the tripartite English-French-Israeli invasion over his nationalization of the Suez Canal in 1956. A victory that resulted in both state ownership of the canal and the stratospheric popularity of Nasser's formula for nationalist rule. But these victories begged responses.


This installment of Thawra covers what happens next. It's a chronology of, one, U.S.-backed preventative counterrevolution, and then also, two, the unification of Syria and Egypt amid growing tensions within the anti-imperialist camp. Tensions that would put Arab nationalists and communists at increasing odds with one another, a conflict that would become increasingly dangerous.”
In January 1957, US. President Dwight Eisenhower announced the Eisenhower Doctrine, which declared that the US would militarily intervene to assist Middle Eastern countries threatened by communism. Already, Iraq, with western backing, tried and failed to orchestrate a coup against a left-leaning, Egypt-aligned, and neutralist Syrian government during the Suez Crisis.
In 1957, the CIA sought to orchestrate its own coup in Syria, amidst a so-called Syrian crisis that hyperbolically declared that Soviet ties to the country meant that it was at risk of falling under communist domination. Meanwhile, the deepening regional divide pushed Egypt and Syria toward the pan-Arab nationalist dream of union. In February of 1958, the Syrian branch of the Ba'ath Party successfully drove Egypt and Syria into the merging of their countries into a single superstate under Nasser's leadership, the United Arab Republic.
The Ba'ath were in part motivated by their fundamental unionist ideology, and in part by their desire to preempt the rise of the Syrian Communist Party. Union with Egypt meant, very clearly, that Nasser would ban all political parties in Syria, the same as he had done in Egypt. The Communists protested in vain, but the Ba'athists pushed forward, naively believing that Nasser would be the muscle and the figurehead, while their party would provide the brains and the ideology.
The United Arab Republic, as we'll discuss in future episodes, would fall apart after a 1961 coup in Syria, led to that country's secession. And that deepening Communist-Ba'ath divide, as we will also discuss in future episodes, that divide will, in Iraq, descend into bloodier and more brutal conflict after that country's July Revolution of 1958. But we end this chapter in July 1958, in Lebanon, when Eisenhower landed US Marines in the country in support of U.S.-aligned President Kamil Shamoon. This implementation of the Eisenhower Doctrine, this first ever US combat operation in the Middle East, it confirmed what was already made clear in the Suez Crisis. The US was now the region's preeminent Western imperial hegemon




Denvir: One key thing that happens in Syria before we get to the Eisenhower Doctrine is that in 1956, amid the Suez crisis, Iraq's interest in controlling Syria went from these half-hearted efforts to unite the countries under the Hashemite crown that we've been talking about, that have been going on for years, to active planning for a coup that, with US and British support, sought to mobilize a variety of forces opposed to the Ba'ath and communists and to the anti-imperialist nationalists' politics of Syria in general. We're talking about Syrian social nationalists, some Druze forces, and the Shishakli circle. How did this coup plot come together? How did it so quickly fall apart and what were the consequences for Syria and for the broader region?


Takriti: Well, here we should see this again in the longer trajectory. Iraq had been wanting to intervene in Syria for a long time, under different banners. This had been a longstanding issue for the Iraqi government. They were concerned that Syria was out of the western fold, and they had been doing regular visits to Syria, Iraqi officials, even after the overthrow of Shishakli, trying to encourage Syria to change its stance and relation to the Pacts. As I mentioned, they did a lot of work with the Fares al-Khoury government, you know, and they tried to entangle it. But then, what the progressive forces do is they remove the Fares al-Khoury government and essentially install or create a new government, which is dominated by the figure of Khalid al-Azm, as I mentioned. Now, it has a figurehead, al-Asali, who is not very strongly associated with any of the progressive forces at this stage. But, you know, he is a figurehead. Under that, you have a range of people allied with the progressive forces.


Now, what happens with this specific coup attempt is that there is growing suspicion among the progressive movements that something is being cooked. They discover sketchy American agents roaming around town with connections, trying to stir the pot. At the same time, there are strange Iraqi machinations going on. So, they're able to pre-empt that. Now, the army itself is not set for a coup of this kind at this stage because it’s no longer the army that existed under Shishakli and before that under az-Za'im. This is an army that had produced a politicized officer class at the stage, and you had a variety of officers allied with a variety of movements.


You mentioned the case of al-Malki, although he was not a Ba'athist. His brother was, and he was close to them. There is a case of Afif al-Bizri, who is a communist, maybe not an official card-carrying member again, but everybody knows that he's close to that party. You have all these politicized figures, and there was no way they were going to allow the hijacking of the Syrian experiment on the part of this Iraqi plot. So the coincidence between the internal and the political: on the political front, you have an active (I wouldn't call it an alliance because it’s not formally an alliance, but an) understanding among the progressive forces, including the communists and the Ba'ath and other forces in the country, that they have a clear, unified agenda, and they're grounded in government. They're there in parliament; they're there in the state. At the same time, you have in the army extensions of these movements, and that means that there could be some element of prevention of external pressure if it happens.


These things even develop their relationship with Egypt later on because what's going on at this stage gets more than just a coup issue. We have the Turks intervening militarily in Syria as part of increasing the pressure. Once they start deciding that the internal situation or the internal attempt to hijack power had failed, what they do is all these rumors are being spread about Syria being taken over by the communists. They’re citing things like the appointment of Afif al-Bizri to the leadership of the army. When you're going around with this paranoid attitude and you're saying this is like seriously falling to communism, Iraq cannot stand watching this happen, Turkey cannot stand watching this happen: We will save the whole region by intervening in Syria! They were creating this atmosphere. That was not going to be met favorably inside Syria, and it was not going to be met favorably by Nasser either. So Syria at this stage, again, this is another reason why you have the importance of this growing Syrian-Egyptian entanglement matter at this stage, because it allows for some breaking of the isolation that can be created through pressures like this that are, of course, at the end of the day, American pressures.


Turkey amassed thousands of troops on the Syrian front, and what was known as the Syria crisis surrounded the situation. Turkey is a strong state. This could have been really bad for Syria, militarily. You have, however, also a geopolitical situation that relieves the pressure because the Soviet Union is also now in the game. The Soviets even threatened Turkey. The Americans then, of course, start threatening the Soviet Union: if you attack Turkey, we will attack you in all of these dimensions. But the Soviet Union also plays an important role in this because, and again, this is quite reflective of the new international environment that was prevailing from the mid-fifties onwards in the Middle East. It became increasingly clear to Western powers that there was a new kid on the block in this regional equation, which, and this new kid, is a superpower. It’s the Soviet Union. Their monopoly over the control of this region was gone. It doesn’t mean that they lost all their positions, but it meant that there were other options for gaining weapons and gaining aid, and that meant their hold was weakened.


Denvir: In 1957, the US attempted its own coup in Syria. To clarify, because there are a lot of coups in Syria in this series, this comes after the failed Iraq-led coup attempt in Syria of 1956. The US coup is made against these extremely hysterical warnings that Syria was becoming a Soviet satellite and its Turkish troops massed menacingly along the border. Also, as the US made this huge arms airlift to Jordan, how did this American coup attempt come about during this so-called Syrian crisis of 1957? How did it take shape, and how did it play out and ultimately fail?


Takriti: So let's start with the background. You have the Americans freaking out, essentially, because there were major changes going on in Syria. Some of these changes had nothing to do with entering the Soviet camp, as the Americans had imagined. However, the Americans decided to interpret them as such. So, you had a set of development projects that took place with countries in the Soviet orbit. For example, there was an agreement with some Czech engineers to work on oil and oil refinery in Homs. There were also some signs that communist fellow travelers like Afif al-Bizri were being assigned major roles in the army, including the leadership of the army. There was a situation where there were agreements, weapons agreements being signed with the Soviet Union. On the heels of the earlier Egyptian agreement that took place with Czechoslovakia in 1955, you had a visit to the Soviet Union from Syrian Defense Minister Khalid al-Azm, who basically arrived at the deal exchanging Syrian grains for weapons.


So all of this was happening in 1957, and the US decided that this situation meant Syria was being taken over by communists. In reality, of course, this was more like Syria heading towards neutralism and trying to exit from complete dependency on the western camp. A western camp that had not provided it with adequate weapons and defense, and a western camp that had sided against its main enemy, the settler colonial state of Israel. A western camp that was undermining all its efforts to achieve complete independence. And a western camp that had initiated a range of military coups in Syria. Let's not forget, it started the whole effort at undermining Syrian democracy by orchestrating the initial Husni al-Za'im coup back in 1949. And multiple cases afterward that we've discussed here involved intervention. So from the Syrian perspective, this had nothing to do with sliding into communism or anything like that. But of course, Eisenhower had just enunciated an insane idea, an insane doctrine, which is totally based on the “Red Scare,” called the Eisenhower Doctrine.


Denvir: This is a really key point here. President Eisenhower announced the Eisenhower Doctrine in January 1957, and it's a pivotal moment for rising US Imperial power in the region. This is in the wake of Suez in the intense conflicts over the Baghdad Pact. And then in 1958, the Eisenhower Doctrine was invoked in Lebanon. Eisenhower sends in US Marines, which we’ll discuss later on.


Takriti: He had enunciated this idea saying that if any Middle Eastern country were to request American assistance or aid, including military aid, to confront what he called “the foreign military aggression,” the US would step in. By that, he meant communists.


Denvir: And it's sort of a renovation of the Monroe Doctrine for the Middle East and for the Cold War era.


Takriti: That’s right because a lot of these experiments in American domination had already been implemented in Latin America years before. We know that the US always viewed Latin America as its backyard and therefore had exerted its earliest imperialist experiments there and in places like the Philippines as well. So now they were extending their sphere of influence here in a sort of replacement of the British and French former role.


What we were dealing with, therefore, is a situation where they had an incentive to intervene in these countries, but they did not want full-scale wars in them because any intervention that would be too much could be dangerous. So under the Eisenhower Doctrine, the main intervention that took place in military form was actually the landing of American troops in Beirut, Lebanon, and we're going to talk about that in a second. But the other form of intervention was to orchestrate coups. They had already done it in Syria before, and they thought they could do it again.


Now, the coup in the American case could either be orchestrated through local agents. In the case of Syria, there were some willing collaborators with them at that stage. The Syrian Social Nationalist Party had shifted into a policy that legitimated working with the Americans at that stage. Of course, it did not continue along these lines. The SSNP might now even deny that it ever did that, but in that period in the 50s, of course, it was engaged. There were also some disgruntled other figures around in Syria that they were trying to coordinate an operation with, that took on this anti-communist talk. There was an addition of pressure on Syria from the Baghdad Pact countries that refused to cooperate within entering that pact. In particular, Turkey was amassing significant troops at the time.


Now, the main coordinator of this attempted coup in Syria was a CIA agent under the name of Stone. The fact is that it was such a badly planned coup, but also it was confronting a better-organized Syrian intelligence service under Abdel Hamid al-Sarraj. Abdel Hamid al-Sarraj was heading the Syrian intelligence agency, the second bureau, and who was responsible for counterintelligence operations at the time, managed to detect this. On August 12, 1957, he was able to even arrest Stone, the main orchestrator of this operation, along with two other CIA agents and a host of Syrian accomplices.


This also led to counter effects because Bizri, who was rising up the army ranks, and who the Americans feared was too close to the communists, now actually had to take action to remove any of those figures that he deemed close to the Americans. He used the uncovering of this operation to make a move in the army, which led him to consolidate his control of the army rather than reducing it. Then we have another situation where you had “the dollars and others freaking out” in relation to these events. With this freak-out, they were considering all sorts of options, including a military-style operation.


Now, this did not eventually pan out because you had Cold War calculations preventing that. There was a fear that should they go in deeper, they would get a Soviet response. Another dimension was that you had other voices in the Western camp cautioning against this action, including Britain, which was worried again that this would lead to negative results.


Denvir: Ironic, given that Britain had just invaded Egypt roughly a year prior as part of the “Tripartite Aggression.”


Takriti: Right. The problem that we were also confronted with in this context was that you had very clear Soviet messaging being sent out, and at the same time, considerable pressure being exerted on Syria from Turkey. You had a situation where, okay, the coup plot might have been uncovered, but the situation was still tense. As I mentioned, the US could have attacked. You had also Turkey still putting pressure on Syria's northern border. It had mobilized forces there, and there were causes for tension between the two countries. They still had the dispute over İskenderun; the Syrians never forgot that the French gave it to Turkey, and Turkey, of course, calls it now the province of Hatay. So, there was a border conflict there.


The Syrians were worried. What would they do if there was a big attack from Turkey? It's a stronger country; it's a country that is allied with the West and armed very well by the West. The one option would have been Soviet alignment, and that was not a scenario that was very much supported by many Syrian political forces. The Communist party clearly would have liked to see that, but others did not, including the Ba'ath and other movements.


Denvir: Not so long after the Syria crisis, Syria ceases to exist as an independent nation. This is a really dramatic shift in domestic and regional politics, with the 1958 unification of Egypt and Syria under Nasser's leadership in a new state called the United Arab Republic. How, after so many years of half-baked attempts to unify with Hashemite Iraq, does the Ba'ath party and their allies in the army drive such a dramatic and fast-paced union with Nasser's Egypt? And what role in particular does the rivalry between the Ba'ath and the communists play here?


Takriti: So, the talk about unity with Egypt was not new. Talk about unity in general was not new in Syria. As we've seen throughout these episodes, there was a great deal of recognition in Syria since independence that the threats surrounding Syria mean it needs a bigger form of regional cooperation for defense. Increasingly, many people were saying this requires full union with other Arab countries. That was one issue that was very important, it’s very important to consider.


Additionally, you had ideological parties that believed in Arabic unity. The Ba'ath is a very good example, but there were also other Arab nationalists very committed to this notion. The question was unity with whom? We've seen that unity with the Iraqis was problematic; unity with Jordan was problematic because these were monarchical regimes associated with the British. That would have meant both changing the republican character of the country and leading to a return to the colonial fold. The only Arab country that had managed to fully exit it at that stage in that neighborhood was Egypt.


As Egypt exits the colonial fold, it becomes clear that that is the most likely country they could cooperate with. Nasser, you should remember, had gotten the British troops out. He signed an agreement for their removal from the Canal region in '54. Then he nationalized the Suez Canal in '56. He had already done the moves we described earlier in '55 by getting Soviet weaponry and Soviet funding. He had demonstrated a commitment to an alignment, played a key role in Bandung and in shaping the Bandung Policy, and in propagating it in this part of the world. He was clearly supporting anti-colonial struggles in the Arab region, including the Algerian revolution, which started in '54, and other revolutions we’ll talk about later on in much greater depth.


So, at this stage, this was a natural country to look for union with. There were many discussions with Nasser about that, in informal and formal ways that had taken place at least since '55. Different ideas were floated. Nasser sometimes was enthusiastic; sometimes he was less enthusiastic. There were different issues on the table, Daniel. Some people favored the federal union. Others favored a unitary state. Those are very different forms of rule. A federal union would have meant that Syria would still exist as an entity of sorts, kind of like what you have in the United States, where you have a federal government, but you have a local state running a lot of local affairs. The federal government is, of course, responsible for defense, foreign relations, and other national matters.


You had people proposing other formulas, confederalism, different types of what was called Endemajie (اندماجیه), which is the type of unity that merges two states into one. At the end, Nasser's view was clearly that he could not come into this situation and run Syria in a heavily decentralized way. In general, this was something a lot of Syrians were willing to accept, certainly some in the Ba'ath. The view in the Ba'ath party at the time, particularly the view of Michel Aflaq, was that Nasser could become the muscle and the Ba'ath, particularly Aflaq, could become the brain for this Arab liberation project that Aflaq and his comrades had long dreamed about.


Denvir: Which is sort of a misreading of the balance of power between Ba'ath and Nasser at the time, especially given that Nasser demands, as a condition of the union, the abolition of all political party life in Syria the same as in Egypt, which means no more Ba'ath party, also no more communists, but no more Ba'ath party, too.


Takriti: One hundred percent. You're absolutely right on this, Daniel. Nevertheless, the Ba'ath agrees to this demand. So you have these negotiations taking place around the possibility of union. They especially become very serious after the crisis we described in Syria, the American coup attempt, the Turkish mobilization of troops on the borders, this increasing Israeli intransigence, the passing of the Eisenhower Doctrine. All of this is creating a situation that is very tense. At the same time, you have the Soviet Union coming in, indicating that it is willing to come and protect Syria against these threats.


That’s alarming for Ba'athists and others who are not communists in Syria because that means essentially that the country will turn communist. In that scenario, of course, the Communist party would be dominant in Syrian politics.


Denvir: And so the Ba'ath are seeing it as either in this moment of crisis and danger that either Syria is going to run into Egypt's nationalist arms, which, if the Ba'ath can pull off what Michel Aflaq wants, becomes the brains of the super state created for the Ba'ath. But if Syria goes into Soviet arms for protection, that's the end of the road for the Ba'ath, and it will ensure communist supremacy in Syria.


Takriti: Yes. Essentially, they’re like, you either go the American route by not doing anything. You either go the Soviet route by appealing to the Soviets for help. Certainly, the Soviets were very happy to indicate they will support Syria in case of Turkish aggression. They played a big role in preventing that. But still, it would have meant they had increasing control over the country. The third option would have been uniting with Egypt. That way, you can carry out a dream that was, you know, ideologically very appealing to the members of the Ba'ath party but also to the Arab masses as a whole.


I’m telling you something again, like an old friend in a brilliant one of the key Palestinian historians of the past century, she's an incredible force, Bayan Nuwayhed al-Hout, who had joined the Ba'ath in the fifties. She was telling me that when they heard the news of the United Arab Republic being established, it was like a dream. She was like, when the United Arab Republic was created, it's like we were living in paradise. We grew up all our lives. We were born into a situation of disunity and oppression, and suddenly we see this thing emerging right after 1956 and Suez, right after pushing the British in the French out, and at a time when the Algerian revolution is raging. It was like we were living in paradise. All these emancipatory projects seemed to be succeeding and on the rise, and it seemed that the revolutionary tide was unstoppable.


I think it's very important for our listeners to hear stories like that because what people don't appreciate enough is how much these feelings and these attachments mattered to people at the time. That’s why the UAR was able to mobilize a huge amount of popular sympathy across the Arab world.


Bayan, the person I referred to, was actually in Amman at the time, and for her, this was living the dream. She was a school teacher in Jordan and joined the Ba'ath party. This was a phenomenon going on in the 50s. I think we have to talk about, by the way, around this time, increasingly many women are also becoming politically active now. They were living the dream. They were like, unity is becoming a reality. In that context, they were willing to sacrifice a party. They were like, yeah, go ahead, let’s liquidate the party, let’s disband all parties. The Ba'ath disbanded voluntarily.


The only problem was that it disbanded on the notion and the assumption that they were going to be given key positions that were influential in government. Of course, they were given positions, but these positions were not effective. They were symbolic positions. Real power was concentrated in the hands of Nasser's men, and he kind of told them that that was going to be the case. It’s not like Nasser was tricking anybody. It’s just I think they didn’t take him seriously enough when he was saying that.


He was very clear. He’s like, you know, I think the Syrian army is too unstable, it’s too ideological. I don’t want ideological officers in the army. He was saying that the Syrian political system is too unstable. That’s how he thought of democratic elections and representations. He thought, let’s disband that. Nasser was driven by a deep sense of providentialism. He really believed that he would carry the liberation vision forward. That’s why, by the way, I always disagree with people that paint him as some power-hungry guy. That wasn’t the point for him. He really believed he was put on this earth for a mission to engage in the Arab liberation project.


The personal gain dimension was not the main driver. That’s at least my historical assessment, and I think there is a lot of evidence that indicates that. This man died quite poor, actually, relatively speaking, and his kids never made it rich. They had middle-class jobs. His objective was not wealth or anything like that. However, he thought that “HE” was going to deliver the region from the miseries of colonials. He thought that actually parties and democratic processes were just avenues that were weakening the nation and weakening anti-colonial politics because they saw the seeds of division instead of allowing people to focus on the mission ahead.


Now, the Ba'ath had a different outlook, but nevertheless, they were willing to accept this position at that stage, and this was their honeymoon period with Nasser. It was not going to last long.


Denvir: How did the communist-Ba'athist alliance in Syria, which lasted roughly from 1955 to 1957, collapse so dramatically? This recurring theme of failed communist-nationalist, particularly communist-Ba'athist, relationships highlights a crucial and often violent internal contradiction within Arab anti-imperialist politics. This historical dynamic significantly influences the narrative we're exploring in this series.


Takriti: This story is very simple, Daniel, and very complicated at the same time. It’s complicated based on the events that took place. The simplicity lies in a very basic fact. One is you will always have interparty competition, driven by both personal and ideological reasons. Both are at play. We've elaborated the ideological reasons in previous episodes. There are clear ideological differences between the Ba'ath and other Arab nationalists and the communists. The communists were insufficiently nationalist, as far as the Ba'athists and Arab nationalists were concerned, and the Arab nationalists and the Ba'athists were insufficiently socialist, as far as the communists were concerned.


Ironically, both tendencies move in the direction of each other. The communists became more interested in questions of Arab unity and more focused on Arab anti-colonial, national agendas by the end of the 1950s. The Arab nationalists became increasingly socialist-oriented by the end of the same period. In a way, ideologically, they're coming closer, but you have another factor intervening, which is the geopolitical factor. If you are a communist, you will want alignment with the Soviet Union ultimately, and you will have a different position on certain governments, including Nasser's government.


By the way, if you are a communist in Syria, you will not read Nasser's government in the same way as the communists in Egypt are reading it. You will be sympathetic to the communists in Egypt facing a crackdown by the Nasser government. It’s a complicated story, you know; there's the geopolitical factor.


Denvir: And if you're a Syrian communist, you do not want to abolish the Syrian Communist Party.


Takriti: You don’t want to abolish the Syrian Communist Party, and you certainly don’t want to abolish it at a moment when it seems that you might be getting closer and closer to the Soviet Union, which is your favorite state in the world. If Bayan Nuwayhed al-Hout and other Ba'athist cadres like her thought that the UAR is heaven on earth, the communists would have thought that establishing a socialist republic allied to the Soviet Union in this part of the world would have been heaven on earth with it. These are important considerations to think about.


Denvir: Before we get into the US Intervention, let's discuss Lebanese politics at this period. Before that, let’s go more in-depth into the longer history, because we haven't focused that much on Lebanon yet. So, lay out that longer background of how Lebanon develops under French colonialism.


Takriti: You have a difficult situation in Lebanon because the French designed their mandate to create a state in the Middle East with a large Christian population in it, and preferably of a Christian majority. Now, it’s debatable whether they were ever able to achieve a Christian majority there, but at least they had a state with a substantial Christian percentage of the population. That meant, of course, creating a state cut off from what had historically been considered to be, in most geographies, Bilad al-Sham.


As we know, all the recent states created in this part of the world were manufactured entities. Some had historic roots; others were byproducts of colonial machinations. In the case of Bilad al-Sham, the geographic construct was always much larger than what we ended up with on the map today, which split Greater Syria into four different mandates during the mandate period. We had Syria, Lebanon, Transjordan, and Palestine mandates established by the colonial powers.


In Lebanon’s case, it had a peculiar status because, when the French wanted to create that mandate, they would have needed only Mount Lebanon to achieve a Christian majority. But Mount Lebanon is an interior region. It has a Christian majority, but it doesn’t have good arable land or access to ports.


They realized that to have access to those areas, you need to incorporate areas with large Sunni and Orthodox Christian populations on the coast and in major cities, and, of course, the Beqaa and the south, the Shia communities. But it was felt they needed to incorporate these areas to make the state viable. Otherwise, it was already a small state. If restricted to the mountain, it wouldn’t have the necessary ingredients for any form of agricultural production or access to ports. So they ended up creating that situation.


Initially, there were protests in all those areas included in the Lebanon Mandate that did not have a Maronite Christian majority. They did not want to be severed from Syria. So, you already had a basis for a future conflict based on that. Another issue was, of course, Mount Lebanon itself had witnessed two civil wars in the past, in the nineteenth century, between its Maronite and Druze components. These sectarian civil wars, as the very distinguished historian Samir Makdisi has noted, were not byproducts of primordial sectarianism.


They resulted from the conditions of the modern age, including European colonialism, changes in political power after the Muhammad Ali invasion of the 1830s, and other factors. We can go into all of this another time; it’s a long Ottoman discussion. But the point is, many unresolved issues emanated from a sectarianization of the space over the nineteenth century. France played a huge role in that story, by the way, in both the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Additionally, you had a very special set of conditions created after the French mandate was so.


During the mandate period, the French privileged, of course, the Christian Maronite elites. They had to take into consideration the pressures coming from other communities, particularly the Sunni elites. Therefore, they created a system that could be described in political science terms as consociationalism, where elite leaderships of different sects would meet to make decisions on behalf of their communities and share power.


Denvir: On behalf of their communities, but really in favor of their elite interests.


Takriti: Exactly.


Denvir: And it's this colonial process that increasingly over time turns what might otherwise be a class dynamic into sectarian conflict. That sectarian dynamic is deeply consequential for Lebanon.


Takriti: In the past, before the sectarianization of Lebanon, class was a much more important category than sect, certainly before the 1830s and 1840s. But then sect increasingly enters into the equation as aSure, I'll continue from where we left off:


very significant political determinant. You know, it was always a social marker. I mean, religious belonging is important in any part of the world, including this one. However, the question of sect now becomes a way of also representing different class interests. And what you find is that new class interests also emerge from this, because if you can make it to the top of your leadership of your sect, you can also access resources through that. You can access government contracts through that. You can access all sorts of advantages through that. And this becomes a big and long-standing problem in Lebanese politics and history that continues to this day. At the same time, it's very difficult to dislodge people from the leadership of their sect because they are always threatening their members of their sect with the fact that there are other sects out there that are out there to get them. So they use inter-sect competition as an excuse to consolidate their positions within each sect.


**Denvir:** What sort of state had Lebanon become after the end of formal French colonialism? And then, more specifically, what was going on in the 1950s and 1958 with these growing conflicts that had sectarian and also class dimensions and also involved a large and really heavily oppressed Palestinian refugee population, all of it a decade and a half before full-blown civil war?


**Takriti:** So if you look at the way the government was organized, the president in Lebanon under this system that the French essentially created had to be a Maronite Christian. The prime minister had to be a Sunni Muslim. The speaker of the House had to be a Shia Muslim. Each sect was accorded a certain position within the governing order. And there are many smaller sects. Beyond the ones that we've mentioned, there's, of course, the Druze, there are the Armenians, there are the Protestants. There are countless sects there. There are Alawites and there are all sorts of communities there that exist. Now, the representation of each community depended on its size and political and economic power. And it also depended on how much the colonial authorities wanted to favor that community.


Of course, the French created a situation where the Maronites came out on top. They had to give some major concessions to the Sunni Muslims and the initial Lebanese formula really was created by elites representing those two sects predominantly. There were other sects that were left out. It was clear that Shia Muslims in particular were underrepresented in government. They got a very low deal initially. It was also clear that the army and the highest offices of the state were concentrated in Christian Maronite hands. That meant that you had a potentially combustive situation in that country.


Additionally, you had a crisis of identity there. Part of what was going on in Lebanon from an early phenomenon was that you had no national education per se initially. The great Lebanese poet, who was also a well-known American author, Jibran Khalil Gibran, had a very famous essay in Arabic saying that you have your Lebanon and I have mine. He was articulating an anti-sectarian vision. He was describing how each sect has its own schooling, schools, and these are funded by different foreign powers. The Russians had their schools, the French had their schools, the British had their schools, and all of these were educating people on different bases and were promoting different visions for the country.


You had people that were very much pro-France, especially among Maronite Christian circles. There were historic connections between France and the Maronite Church, because France was a Catholic power, and in the Ottoman period, it claimed the position of a protector of Catholics in the Middle East. Of course, the Maronites were a catholic population. So that historic connection turns into a form of alignment or allegiance almost to France, and I'm talking here culturally as well as potentially politically. That was not shared by other communities. Sunni Muslims did not view themselves as culturally connected to France or politically. The same applies to other Muslim communities and groups. Certainly, Orthodox Christians had less of a connection also with that particular orientation. So you had many different outlooks here, and again, we can't just reduce it to sects.


Sometimes people are tempted to just reduce it to sects, and I understand it because sectarian actors end up shaping the history of the country disproportionately. But what is interesting also from the perspective of the left is that you had an emerging nonsectarian or even potentially anti-sectarian space, taking shape through such parties as the Communist Party, and as the SSNP, the Syrian Social Nationalist Party that we spoke about earlier, which had an actually anti-Sectarian agenda.


**Denvir:** There's also the Progressive Socialist Party led by a prominent Druze named Kamal Jumblatt.


**Takriti:** Yes, and that becomes more complicated because Kamal Jumblatt, for example, advocates an anti-sectarian agenda. Eventually, it definitely becomes that, and he definitely creates a party that is bigger than his own sect. But sometimes other people viewed his activities with suspicion, suggesting that he was advocating a nonsectarian vision, however, he was also seen as a sectarian leader. So there are these question marks around that particular party, but yes, definitely officially it took a very anti-sectarian stance, and the Lebanese National Movement, which was led by Jumblatt and which he played a key role in leading, did advocate an anti-sectarian program, especially during the civil war and after his assassination, most likely by Syria.


So we have these different forces coalescing and emerging that are advocating an alternative to this system. Nevertheless, the system is there, and it is a system that is very rigid, very ossifying. It's very difficult to break out of. Can you imagine here in the United States if people were expected to vote for Congress and the Senate on the basis of which church or denomination they belonged to or which religion they belong to? You know, if under that system, you do a survey and you decide, well, Protestants constitute 50%, therefore they'll get 50% of the seats. Catholics constitute 30%. I mean, by the way, I don't know what the numbers are, but you know, that would be the way to do it.


**Denvir:** It doesn't produce a government with a lot of legitimacy, despite the democratic pretense. And neither does the disenfranchisement and severe oppression of Palestinian refugees.


**Takriti:** Yeah, absolutely. And of course, what happens is that the most marginal groups, the smallest groups in society, get almost no say in government if you create such a system. Let’s say, in America, for example, what would happen to Jews, Muslims, and Hindus, who are much smaller than Christian communities? If you're not treating people as citizens and are thinking of them as sectarian subjects or sectarianized subjects, you can call it citizenship, but it's not. By definition, citizenship has an element of equality built into it.


Now, there are many nuances to the system and many complications. Some people say it had elements of a working formula, and there's a very detailed and nuanced discussion of this by Ussama Makdisi, a previous guest of yours, in his latest book, “The Age of Coexistence,” which I recommend our listeners check out. Personally, I have always thought it's a deeply corrupt and terrible system for any country in the world, and that's the general leftist view. You cannot create a system based on dividing citizens along sectarian lines and get anywhere.


**Denvir:** How are all these things you're laying out building to a point of crisis in 1958?


**Takriti:** In 1958, the Lebanese president, Camille Chamoun, who was quite close to the Americans, wanted to stay in power beyond the constitutional limits of his presidency. He believed that if he made his case to the Americans, they would help. He made a vigorous argument, saying, "I need to stay in power; otherwise, we'll end up with communism," and so forth. He was supported by Charles Malik, a well-known right-wing philosopher at the American University of Beirut. Malik was a prominent figure in Lebanese politics and was also a religious fanatic and Islamophobe.


Dr. Nate George from SOAS University of London has done fantastic research showing how some cold warriors in the region were driven by Islamophobia and civilizational discourses. Malik even lamented the end of British and French colonialism because he saw it as a bulwark against Islam. These figures worked hard to portray the situation to the Americans as one requiring intervention against their local foes, who were mainly representatives of other sects with different understandings of identity and political ambitions, particularly inspired by Nasserism.


After the 1956 tripartite aggression against Egypt, there was enormous solidarity generated. One of my good friends in Lebanon, Akram Sarana, a student leader at the time, described how she went to the Egyptian embassy demanding weapons to fight in Port Said to help liberate Arab land. There was a significant alignment between the Chamoun government and the Western project, leading to two trends in the country: one pushing for an anti-imperialist, unified Arab world, and another aligning with the West as a defense.


This intensified after Syria and Egypt united to establish the United Arab Republic, creating a serious crisis. There were student demonstrations and mobilizations across the country protesting Chamoun's attempts to extend his term, manipulate the constitution, and other events orchestrated by his supporters, including the assassination of the anti-Chamoun journalist Nasib Al Matni in May 1958. Matni was a Maronite but also a Nasserist, showing an anti-sectarian trend developing, especially on the left.


Chamoun's heavy-handed policies against protesters over several months, including killing and wounding many, along with a rigged election in 1957 with CIA help, enraged many people and led to instability. This situation was seen as almost a revolt against the rule of Chamoun, leading to attacks on symbols of US power, including the burning down of the US Information Service Library. It was in this context that Chamoun officially requested the activation of the Eisenhower Doctrine, asking for American troops to come to Lebanon.


**Denvir:** And we won't get into this in too much depth now, as it's a challenge for the whole series because things are constantly happening simultaneously across the region. The Marines are landing at roughly the same time that free officers in Iraq are taking power in the July revolution. We’ll go into more detail on that later.


**Takriti:** Yes, absolutely. This is why it's difficult to disentangle what's going on and why it's impossible to tell one story at a time in this region. In this series, "The Dig," we touch upon so many different themes simultaneously, addressing them both diachronically and synchronically because it's very complicated.


**Denvir:** It's a very tough territory to design a useful map for.


**Takriti:** Yes, and to be honest, any part of the world is tough to write a good history for. But here, we're dealing with an integrated space culturally and linguistically, yet divided geographically into different states with significant external intervention. I will remind our listeners of something mentioned in the first episodes: what Azmi Bishara called "the Arab question." In the 20th century, the Arab question revolved around what to do with Arab territories after the Ottoman Empire's disintegration and the entry of Western colonialism. This question remains significant because these regions have not achieved genuine independence and sovereignty to this day.


**Denvir:** What role did the Palestinian refugee population in Lebanon play in the growing political conflict leading up to the US intervention in 1958? We'll discuss the development of Palestinian politics in more detail in the next episode.


**Takriti:** Let's talk about how this demented sectarian system, and I use this word purposefully and stand by it. This system was inherently anti-refugee because it categorized Palestinian refugees based on their sect. When refugees started arriving in Lebanon in 1948, there was enormous sympathy from all sects. Everybody opposed the fall of Palestine, including some Maronite leaders who had previously communicated with Zionist leaders. We know that Zionist leaders reached out to prominent Lebanese figures, including leaders of the Gemayel Family, Camille Chamoun, and many others.


However, the Zionists themselves admitted that while these figures might align with them out of convenience, none were actual Zionists. Nobody in this part of the world believed in Zionism. So, there was sympathy for Palestinians across the board. However, there was also hostility toward the idea of Palestinian presence in Lebanon from the Maronite elite, who viewed it as changing the country's demographic character, primarily because most Palestinian refugees were Muslim. This presented a dilemma for the Lebanese political system.


Being a sectarian political system, the entry of Palestinian refugees altered the sectarian balance. The response to Palestinian refugees in Lebanon was to insulate them from political and economic life as much as possible. They were given no political rights and were also discriminated against by law, with no economic rights.


**Denvir:** And they did not have freedom of movement outside of the refugee camps at this point.


**Takriti:** Yes, refugee camps were and continue to be horrible places. I want to make a small comparison and note something very interesting. Most of the refugee camps that became Palestinian refugee camps, or many of them at least, were former Armenian refugee camps. When the Armenian refugees arrived in Lebanon, unlike the Palestinian refugees, they were actually given access to Lebanese citizenship. They became part of the Lebanese political community, an economic community, and were absorbed into Lebanese life.


**Denvir:** Armenians are Christians, mostly.


**Takriti:** Entirely in the case of the Armenians in Lebanon. Had they not been Christians, it might have looked very different. If these were, let’s say, that arrived at a certain moment after the French had established their mandate, we don’t know how it would have looked, but certainly when it came to the Palestinians, it was treated as a menace, as a threat to the delicate balance that was established by the sectarian formula. What helped this was that the ideology invented by the French, the ideology of identity invented by the French and propagated through their schools, encouraged the notion that somehow Lebanese were racially, and certainly Lebanese Christians were racially and ethnically different from Palestinians, Syrians, and indeed all Arabs around.


Now, for any serious historian, this is a ridiculous proposition because we know it’s not the case. But those people inventing it, primarily French colonial officials, and the local figures that decided to buy into or to “drink the Kool-Aid” that they were providing, convinced a lot of people that Lebanese are Phoenicians, and particularly Lebanese Christians are Phoenicians. Sometimes they have other versions saying they are descendants of Assyrians and other communities that predated the Arab invasion. You had all sorts of different claims floating around.


Of course, by the way, FYI from ancient historians will tell you that the attempt to differentiate Phoenicians from Canaanites is a bit sketchy, to say the least. Phoenicians is the word used by the Greeks to refer to Canaanite groups that were coastal, which means that the whole Syrian coast included populations of this sort. Good luck trying to disentangle what’s Lebanese in this formula and what’s Palestinian and what’s Syrian. It’s a very weird situation, because you compare Lebanon to Palestine, then the dances are the same, very similar. They both have the Dabke. The food is very, very similar. The music is very similar, the language, the accents in the north of Palestine, and the south of Lebanon are so close, there’s so much in common. There’s actually barely any difference. It’s so minimal. The same can be said for other regions connected to Syria. So all these racial theories are bogus. We know that to begin with. However, if they’re taught enough in schools and if they’re propagated long enough and if they’re repeated over and over again, people start buying into them.


So the Palestinians were subjected to that system, and those kinds of theories helped with that. Now, they were denied employment in many, many sectors. There’s a list of over 70 professions that Palestinians are not allowed to work in.


And this, of course, was in contrast to what was going on in a place like Syria, where by law, and we mentioned when this happened in 1949 and through the efforts of progressive figures in the government, like Akram al-Hawrani and Michel Aflaq, that Palestinians were allowed to work in all government offices. Later on by 1955, we even have the inclusion of Palestinians in the military as part of the military service. So in Syria, they created a system that allowed Palestinians to keep their identity to preserve their right of return, while having civil rights and equal economic rights, and in many ways, some political rights, because Palestinians were participating in many different aspects of Syrian politics at the time.


Lebanon was a different story. The amount of discrimination was unbelievable. The amount of control that the “Deuxième Bureau,” the second bureau, which is basically the intelligence service in Lebanon, had over their refugee camps. It was a reign of terror. They would not allow people to build. They would discriminate against people in every element of life. Remember, we're dealing here with a population already brutalized, dispossessed, and uprooted. This reality did not necessarily express the popular feeling in Lebanon at the time, but it certainly was the official political position.


So you had many people who were sympathetic in Lebanon to the Palestinian plight. Unfortunately, the government acted against Palestinian refugees and continues to act against them to this day. They used the argument that they were protecting the right of return for these refugees, and that somehow, by denying them certain rights or refusing their resettlement, they were preserving this right. However, this was a bogus claim because Palestinian refugees themselves did not want to be resettled. They were insisting, "We want to go back home," but denying certain rights meant they couldn't live an ordinary life while in exile.


**Denvir:** Did that dynamic of sectarian-motivated anti-Palestinian oppression contribute to the political crisis in 1958?


**Takriti:** That was a part of the political crisis, but I would say that it was not yet the dominant theme in that political crisis. So we had generalized fears about the presence of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon, and there was a fear that these refugees were becoming more and more active in leftist movements and other radical bodies. Certainly, there is no question about it; Palestinian refugees did play a big role in the creation of or at least the expansion of leftist and progressive circles and revolutionary circles across the region, including in Lebanon. That’s definitely a theme in existence.


Now, I should add an important note here: we should never forget the class dimension here, even when it comes to the refugee question. Palestinians who belonged to the upper classes and were able to bring capital, and there was a very large number of them, by the way, part of the reason why Beirut was flourishing in the 50s, was that you had this influx of capital from Palestine to it. Haifa was the big Mediterranean port in the 40s and 30s; larger than Beirut. All this capital from Palestine’s ports and trade was diverted to Beirut in the aftermath of the Nakba.


Lebanon presented itself in the 1950s as the place to conduct business in the Middle East. The kind of place where east meets west, where western companies could operate to engage the rest of the region.


**Denvir:** So we've discussed all the context then we have the US Marines landing at Lebanese President Chamoun’s invitation in 1958 with the July revolution in Iraq happening in the background. How does this operation unfold and what are its consequences?


**Takriti:** On the military front, the operation was pretty large. You had the launch of a military operation called “Operation Blue Bat” and it was authorized on the 15th of July 1958. This witnessed Eisenhower essentially saying, "I'm serious about my doctrine." Now, there was no actual military threat to deal with per se. This is the irony about this operation. This was actually more about dealing with internal opponents rather than external ones. It's not like Nasser was saying, "I'm gonna invade from the UAR." It's not like the Soviet Union was saying, "I'm gonna invade Lebanon." So the whole thing was bogus to begin with. The purpose was to make a show of force and demonstrate that they're supporting Chamoun and they were going to do that by taking control of the main essential organs of transport in the country, the airport, the port. They were going to show marines in the country to demonstrate that America is serious there with all of its weaponry and all of its naval divisions. And essentially, there were like 14,000 troops involved. It's huge. And there were like all these naval forces, the whole of the United States sixth fleet. They had aircraft carriers. They had all of these different operational command centers involved. They had land forces, second provisional marine force, the United States army task force 201, and allies were involved here. What that meant was that there was this big message sent out. However, that created an additional pressure, you know, rather than lowering the temperature, it actually antagonized people more. At the end of the day, the solution to the crisis was not military. It ended up being political.


You know, Chamoun was not going to be president. He was not able to secure another term. But a compromise was orchestrated, and the Americans helped with this compromise, but also Nasser played a big role in it. So the compromise that took place was the election of General Fouad Chehab, who was a military leader, of course, also a Maronite military leader as the president in Lebanon. He was essentially a compromise candidate, and his election marked the beginning of an era in Lebanese history known as the Chehabist period. He sought to somehow create a new type of Lebanese state. Actually, many people say that the first real Lebanese state started under him. He started creating state institutions that do not necessarily serve one particular sect but are open to all sects. They represent Lebanon as a whole. So that was a big part of this project. It was a kind of way of achieving some level of reconciliation because effectively what you had in the closing months of '57, in the months of '58 was effectively the country having a mini civil war, really, all these clashes and counter clashes, all these clampdowns, this was the only solution to it: to come up with the formula like this. Now, of course, this was not a satisfactory finale to the situation. It was not even a final act in the Lebanese saga because it did not deal with the root causes of the problem, which is that the whole sectarian system was still in operation. So even if you were to expand the state, you still had to deal with the fact that the politics surrounding the state were sectarian. So you're not going to solve sectarianism by expanding bureaucracies and creating services and maybe even promoting a sense of national identity. It's not enough. You needed to end the sectarianization of politics and the process of selecting politicians on a sectarian basis. And the other thing that was not actually dealt with was the Palestinian question because rather than relaxing the oppression of Palestinians, what actually intensified it, it was very much of a military mindset and really was cracking down and adding pressure to Palestinian activities in significant ways. So this is the Lebanese side of the equation. 


On the regional side, 1958 is also important, and the US marine landing was also important because it created tension regionally. It sent a signal that heightened the temperature at a time when the region was already very hot. It added fuel to the fire. It did not need to happen that way. All those that were anti-colonial in outlook saw this as one more episode in American attempts to dominate the region, which, of course, was the American project at the time.