This is the Dig podcast's 16 part series on the 20th century political history of the Mashrik, or Arab Beast. 16 parts plus a two-part epilogue.

I spent nearly 40 hours with the brilliant historian, Abdel Razak Takriti, to tell this giant, comprehensive story, focusing above all else, on the diverse radical currents that emerged, to challenge Western imperialism and colonialism across the region, very much including the ongoing Zionist settler colonial project in Palestine.

Abdel Razaktakriti, or Ahmed for short.

He started out as my guest.

He very quickly became Thawura's co-creator.

When we started the series in February.

Abbott and I only had a vague sense of where we were going.

Now that we're done, we sat down to record this short preface, in order to give you a sense of what to expect.

This series is not just about Palestine, but also an in-depth political history of Egypt, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf States.

It's also a history of the Western imperialism and colonialism that have, for more than a century, fundamentally shaped the region.

Fawara is a political education project dedicated to undoing the reactionary colonialist propaganda, fueling support for the unfolding Israeli genocide in Gaza.

And all the horrors that led up to it.

The West has convinced itself, perversely, that we are the victims of an Arab world full of backward fundamentalists, who irrationally want to do violence unto us.

This wildly absurd view is only credible, if the real history of the region and the West's role within it, is thoroughly mystified.

Thawara is a project aimed at the very heart of the mystifications that have sustained a century plus of colonialism and imperialism in the Middle East.

Mystifications that led to the current genocide in Gaza.

It's a history that we grasp, not only by studying the cloak and dagger politics of elite actors, but also, from a long look at those revolutionary movements in the Middle East, that endeavored to make an altogether different world.

This is a comprehensive history unlike anything you'll find elsewhere.

Here's a quick conversation with Ahmed to explain a bit more.

Abid for starters.

I think we should emphasize a basic, historical, and conceptual point, which is that you can't understand the history or present of the Arab beast without putting colonialism and imperialism front and center.

It's not just one or an occasional facet of regional politics.

It was and remains, absolutely, overwhelmingly, inescapably central.

And so as a result, so much of the Arab politics we explore.

There are these various currents grappling over how the Arab East can confront and move beyond these persistent, painful realities of constant Western intervention.

Right.

And and this is what's so glaringly obvious in this in this part of the world, but that is sometimes hidden in the standard Western narratives around it.

When people talk about colonialism and imperialism.

It's often presented in the West as a way of allocating blame elsewhere for their, for regional failures.

Um, somehow, uh, they turn it around and it becomes about these Arabs, uh, are, are so self-absorbed in their own, uh, lives, they don't want to accept responsibility for, uh, their own failures, which is, of course, a classic colonial crope in its own right.

And of course, we see it used against racialized and oppressed populations worldwide, including within the United States itself.

Uh, when people uh, start saying, oh, why are uh, Native Americans or why are racialized populations, black populations, uh, Latinx populations, others.

Why are they blaming the ruling order for their for the Ls they are facing?

There's this attempt to dismiss their very profound experiences, and these are structural experiences.

So here, uh, the role of progressive and critical thought is to come back and say, actually, these structural facts, they they matter, because they shape the world we live in.

And the world we live in is not a world in which you had somehow this equal set of opportunities out there.

This myth of like you just have to have self-reliance and accept responsibility for reactions and you'll be fine.

That's not the way the world functions.

That's, and colonialism and imperialism definitely have undermined the projectories of this particular part of the world, partly because the sovereignty question in that part of the world is still not resolved and has not been tackled for a long time.

The external intervention in this region. Has created multiple small states that have had a set of legitimation crises that are very profound.

It is entrenched a system of rule that is very much absolutist in nature and most of the monarchies and dictatorial in nature in most of the republics.

This was not just a byproduct of internal trajectories, as we show in the series.

External powers play the big role in it.

Telling that story while accounting for local agency and for the role of people and creating their own histories and also for local contingencies that took place and produced undesired results.

As a result of different processes that people could not have possibly foreseen at the time, is a challenging task.

But we try to do both.

In Thora, we do not belittle the role of colonialism and imperialism because it's a very profound role and it continues to this day.

And honestly, Daniel, if you look at the region today, it is practically one gigantic American base, with a major settler colony planted in the heart of it.

This is quite astonishing.

So we cannot like ignore that.

There are, of course, sites of resistance to that project.

But the map does not lie this way.

And if you look at the amount of American military investment. And wars that were subjected to that region.

Certainly in the past 20 years, this region has been the main focus of America's military entanglements in the same way that Latin America in previous decades used to be the main focus.

So, we have this set of, you know, realities that cannot be ignored, but that are often brushed aside in the mainstream, either through a complete dismissal or through utter silence.

Who's talking about Iraq war today, for example?

Who's talking about the, that's the genocide today?

You know, these are important questions.

Now, while we talk about the colonial and imperial rule, We also allocate much time.

Daniel, on the different attempts of local forces and uh political parties and and large scale mass-based movements to try to create a different world.

And we talk about the limitations of these attempts.

And we talk about often the distractions that happened that took place that prevented a more greater coordination between these movements, because the other dimension that's important in Thorah is actually that we are reflecting here on the limits and possibilities of progressive leftist action that took place with an eye to learning lessons for the for the future.

This present reality of the region being one giant U.S. Military base with a settler colony in the middle of it.

It's in so many ways the product of the defeats suffered by these revolutionary movements.

These extraordinarily varied revolutionary movements that we focus on in Thawada.

Why amid today's genocide in Gaza, which is the context within which we decided to do this series together?

Why do you think that it's important to recover and learn from this history of all of these political currents, that challenged Western imperialism, colonialism and Zionism, most notably, but not exclusively, Arab nationalism, communism, Bathism, and also the many currents that waged the Palestinian revolution from Fata to the to the popular front for the liberation of Palestine.

Why is this history a useful one for us now?

We are not just doing this series for the sake of revolutionary trivia.

That's absolutely true.

And and Daniel, if we want to understand the context of the current genocide.

Everything we've been doing in this series relates to this context.

For example, listeners might uh, want answers to the to the question of why is it that you have a big state like Egypt that's bordering Raza, sitting around, having its own sovereignty violated by this Israeli settler colony, uh, being subjected to aggressive action and witnessing a huge genocide, a total daily massacre unfolding.

Every minute, every hour, next door, and they're not only doing nothing, but they're also complicit.

That's what, where does that come from?

Would it have happened 4050, 60 years ago?

You know, these are important questions.

Why is it that you have a situation where there's an active front, for example, alongside the Lebanese border today?

But not in the case of the Jordanian border or the Syrian border.

Why do we have a situation where Saudi Arabia is silent?

These are questions that have to do with each individual state.

But to understand the actions of each one of these states, we have to understand their trajectories, their their actual experiences and the way their their political histories developed.

We also have to understand their political interests and economic interests and the way their social movements have fared.

To understand this genocide, also, we have examined the centrality of the Palestinian cause to the region, because there is also massive, massive and unprecedented popular mobilizations connected to this genocide.

Uh, but also uh, they have a long history to them.

A history of solidarity with Palestine that is unparalleled with solidarity with any struggle in that particular region.

And throughout the series, we see that Palestine to the Arab East is the equivalent of South Africa to the Southern African region, or Vietnam, to the East Asian region, or to Cuba in Latin America.

It is it was a catalyst.

For solidarity, for revolutionary imagination, and it continues to be so, to be done.

You know, it serves that function to this very day.

So these are important issues to to to think about, we are through engaging with this history.

We try to look at how the different states in the region are operating, but also how the different movements in the region are operating.

Now, more importantly, also, we're looking at how Palestinian politics developed and how it developed in relation to this very violent, designed a settler colonial project.

And that Zionist central colonial project is often misunderstood because it is not usually treated in relation to the regional realities that prevailed in the broader Arab East.

I don't think you will see that that kind of treatment happening in most settings.

The way it's this issue is talked about in the American mainstream. Is often uh, in terms of the particular history of the, the, the, the, the, in isolation uh, of the history of the, Palestinian people and the surrounding uh, Arab region.

It's a very particular type of Jewish history also that marginalizes the voices of Arab Jews, as well as the voices of anti-Zionist Jews that try to challenge this project.

In Thora, we talk about those experiences.

But we also talk about the meaning. Of having a settler colony, uh, put in the middle of a region like the Arab East and the catastrophic implications they said on everybody.

Uh, so the genocide.

Once it's viewed in this historical perspective, we start understanding that it's part of a colonial continuum.

A long-standing colonial continue, it could not have happened without authorization from the Western states today, but also it could not have happened without all the enormous amount of work they did to impose on this region.

A new settler colonial reality.

Now, when it comes to revolutionary movements and their relation into the relationship to the current genocide, you know, the discussion is multifaceted.

Uh, and uh, I think that in Thora, we invite reflection rather than just uh, clear cut answers to these to these questions.

But one area for reflection is what does it mean for something like the Palestinian anti-colonial struggle to have been led at one point by secular forces that were influenced often by leftist ideologies that were definitely exhibited different forms of engagement with Marxism, with 3rd worldist leftist thought, with different political traditions.

What did it mean for it now to come into a new era, where the resistance of an armed kind definitely is now led by Islamic movements.

And how is that used both?

What does it mean locally for social and economic struggles and other struggles that have to do with internal Palestinian and Arab arena?

But also, what does it mean for the attempts of colonial forces?

And illegitimizing the Palestinian people and attacking them and undermining them?

And how does it intersect with war and terror ideologies?

That have wreaked havoc against the Arab people and on the Arab world for, for, and, and broader Muslim world for quite a while now.

So all of these questions are important.

Also, uh, I think it's it's, uh, through providing historical context.

We're able to understand better.

Both the leftist movements that operate on the ground, but also the Islamic currents, including, uh, Hamas, including Islamic, jihad, including, uh, other parties that people don't often talk about, like, Hesbutarin, there's, Where do they come from?

What are they responding to?

What's the colonial context out of which they emerge?

These are questions that we answer.

And I think once we have greater depth, we can understand the political reality is on the ground better, but also for those that are interested in leftist revival or progressive revival, we can begin to reflect on better pathways for engagement, given the fact that we've reflected on the lessons on the past.

How would you situate the history that we do here in terms of, in terms of the existing scholarship of Middle Eastern and Arab politics?

And then, and then relatedly, how does what we're doing here relate or contrast with the Orientalist conventional wisdom about Arab politics, the popular common sense that is so dominant among so many people in the West.

You already touched on this a bit in terms of the conventional framing of the Israeli story.

The series builds upon decades of scholarship that has been trying to reject the Orientalist narrative and contest it and build a better, basically modeled of knowledge.

And I use better with emphasis here because I do believe that emancipation is better than domination.

And Orientalism at the end of the day was geared towards dominating this part of the world or facilitating that domination or justifying it.

Uh, whereas, and to this day, we have variants of that happening, uh, now it's less likely to be seen in traditional university departments, and you see it more and more in places like think tanks and policy centers and and that sort of uh, The Atlantic magazine.

Places like that for sure.

But you still find residues, of course, in universities.

You still find residues, even in progressive spaces.

Even lack of interest in understanding this history in detail is a form of Orientalist approach in itself, because what it does is, it's a way of saying, well, I can talk about this part of the world without really knowing anything about it or having the desire to learn anything about it.

So, fortunately, I think the new generations and certainly the new forms of progressivism that we're seeing developing nowadays are not adopting the stands, and we see massive interest actually in studying different parts of the world and understanding them and engaging with them on their own terms.

So this is a very positive development.

However, while there's been a lot of work, challenging orientalism at the discursive level.

In my own scholarship, I've noticed, and this is, in a way, what I was trying to do as a scholarly project, but also in Thota, for a variety of reasons, the traditional political history arena has been left to reactionary forces, and to right wing forces.

We've done good work on some aspects of social history.

You know, there have been good studies that have appeared in that regard, although not enough since the 1980s, after the linguistic turn and the discursive turn, and we had the decline in that kind of work, and I think we need more of it to come back.

Studies of workers, movements, studies of peasant movements, studies of movement in general, that are grounded in very rich investigations of the trajectories of how people organize and mobilize and and challenge different aspects of oppression in their lives.

This is a very important need.

And I think in Thoro, we try to account for these different social struggles.

And but also, this is not to dismiss, you know, some of the studies that have taken place in the past is just saying that we need more of that.

And I hope that Tahora will offer an invitation that would encourage people to do more of that kind of work, but also political movements.

Which, again, that field has often been seen as well believe that for the right wing people.

They're the ones that study this.

And in a way, there's a certain stigma around it.

It's about kings and battles.

It's about, uh, you know, uh, leftist histories in general developed to this taste towards that field.

But what's very important to know is uh, well, in the case of colonized spaces, that field uh, needs to be emphasized actually.

Uh, because we, we have to talk about the story of the movements that we're trying to emancipate, and that were worked really hard, and which 1000s of women and men and and, and 1000000s of people around them around these kid committed caterers, were trying uh, to change uh, the world around them.

That's not a story relating to the established order, celebrating the established order.

It's a radical story.

It's a story worth telling for any progressive person.

But it cannot be told without understanding, also, the reactionary world around these people.

And that's where the histories of state formation and the histories of imperial powers and their intersection of what's going on on the ground.

Any serious study has to account for all 3 different angles.

And in a way, that's what we've been trying to do in total.

Our horizon is emancipatory.

That's our focus, that's obviously our objective.

I know that's why you do what you do, Daniel.

And that's why I do what I do.

That's why we care about public, political education.

But at the end of the day, while caring and loving the popular movements, uh, you know, we care about them and love them the most, obviously.

But also we want to understand the environment in which they were entangled and and the foes against which they were battling.

We're at a moment when the American left at least.

It feels like it's becoming increasingly divided and sectarian as people in the movement, I think, despair at our inability, even amid a year of such widespread mass mobilization, our inability, to force the U.S. In Israel, to put an end to the genocide in Gaza.

The Arab radical and revolutionary movements that we discuss in this series.

They were also often, very often, in conflict with one another, sometimes lethal conflict.

What can we learn today as organizers and political actors from how Arab radicals succeeded or failed?

At confronting all sorts of intense dilemmas throughout the 20th century.

Well, Daniel, there is no simple answer to this, uh, but in a way, uh, we can provide a simple answer, which is the simple, quick answer is sectarianism is a bad idea when you're confronting a major foe, uh, like colonialism and uh, accompanied by a hydra of of capitalism, social oppression, patriarchal oppression, and the full package.

You're dealing with horrendous combination, a toxic combination, a monstrous combination.

That is really creating a lot of oppression on the ground, both economics, social, and political.

So if you're gonna go sectarian and fighting it, uh, you might not achieve the desired uh, results.

And that we have seen in very specific but very important moments in other Arabic history that have had disastrous results.

So there's at least 3 major currents to the Arab left that we've focused on in the series and that constitute the core movements, largest movements that have operated in the region.

There's the communist current, which is the oldest, uh, and in many ways, it has a very rich theoretical history and a rich also history of engagement.

And then you have the Bathist and the and the movement of Arab nationalist currencies are the big 3 movements that have shaped the Arab left in many ways.

You can count them as mother movements.

They produced multiple different, of course, offshoots and splits, and but the contests between these 3 have really weakened them in certain key moments.

We've seen this in era.

The purges that had happened, initially against the Bath, Bath and the Nationalists, but then later on, against the communists.

We're not helpful.

The, uh, contest, uh, even in a different direction, uh, on the state level.

The contest between, uh, Abdel Karian Klassen and Zamal Abdel Nassen was not helpful.

The bloody histories of confrontation between these different movements really affected the future of the region and powerful ways.

I'm not saying, uh, and and certainly in Thorah, uh, we, while emphasizing this fact, we do not dismiss the historical contingencies that produced it.

In fact, uh, we're very attuned to the nuances.

Of why this happened.

There's mutual suspicion.

There are moments when people felt that they could either die or fight the other movements.

There were also profound ideological disagreements.

And in today's movements, we do have profound, also ideological disagreements.

Back in the 1950s, the communists were right to suggest that they have a much more anti-capitalist program to the bath, for example.

The bath, for example, it was not advocating, the full uh, transfer of the means of production, from uh, ownership over the means of production, from the uh, capitalist uh, classes.

Okay?

So over the question of capitalism, they were serious. Disagreements.

But it was, however, promoting different forms of social democracy, greater intervention of the state in the market, and so on and so forth, which would have been definitely, you know, from a leftist perspective and advantageous relative to what that preceded.

But, you know, the communists uh, would have would have uh, said that they have uh, a more uh, active.

Actively a radical vision on that in that regard.

Likewise, from a Bathist perspective, it would have said that the fact that they were unfettered by directors from Moscow meant that they could develop a fully anti-colonial vision when it came to places like Palestine and elsewhere.

And even Syria and Lebanon.

And, you know, we saw that, actually, the bath itself emerged out of a struggle over what should be done in relation to Syrian, Lebanese independence in the mid 30s.

So these ideological disagreements are profound, but at the end of the day, there has to be a working formula.

There has to be a way to find a sense of focus around the big and very powerful, you know, coalition.

That is promoting oppression in the world that we're living in.

And and here in the United States.

This is a very powerful set of forces.

Finding common ground is really, really important.

It does not mean sacrificing ideological visions.

It does not mean actually saying, oh, let's have a Kumbaya moment.

We're all happy and everybody is in agreement and it's all great.

You know, there needs to be a very clear understanding of what brings people together, while also people can also reflect on what drives them apart.

But what troubles me often is not even the ideological disagreements.

Daniel.

It draws me about the American left sometimes, uh, is that often, uh, much of the conversation is certainly in relation to Palestine, and nowadays, is somehow restricted to the realm of tactics.

Not even strategies, not even principles, tactics.

And people allow entire relationships to collapse over tactical discussions.

And I'm like, that is unacceptable in the context of a genocide like this.

We need a major, major historic block to be formed to be able to overthrow the system.

Okay, and that historic block will need to integrate a broad social base.

It will need to think about genocide in relation to also a different modes of oppression that are operating internally within this country, but also externally.

It has to invite us to ask bigger questions about how American politics works as a whole.

Again, the genocide in this way actually tells us a lot about the world we live in.

It's a world in which you can have an entire congress with a few exceptions, going comfortably to sleep at night while they're actually not only authorizing, but funding and arming the killing of an entire people.

It's quite amazing.

So what does that tell us about this whole system?

What does it tell us about the coalition that needs to be activated to defeat the system?

These are big questions.

We have to ask them boldly.

We have to ask them honestly, uh, without ego, without, you know, being overly obsessed about baggage, organizing baggage from the past.

We have to ask them with a sense of commitment to the people on the ground that are suffering.

Once our compass. Is pointing towards Gaza.

You know, once we have this clarity, then we would not allow pettiness to stand in the way of political engagement that could be beneficial and helpful and hopefully emancipatory in its in its outcome.

Thank you very much for listening.

Again, the dig is a political education project dedicated to helping us all better understand this world in order to change it.

I'm so grateful to Abin for making Fawaro with me.

If you like what you listen to here, please support us at patreon.com slash the dig.

And if you want to listen to other dig episodes beyond our Thoughtwest series, and we really do cover everything, subscribe to the dig, wherever you get podcasts. 