This episode of the dig is brought to you by our listeners who support us at patreon.com and by Haymarket books, which has loads of great left-wing titles, perfect for dig listeners like you.

One that you might like is environmentalism from below, how global people's movements are leading the fight for our planet by Ashley Dawson.

In this urgent intervention, scholar activist Ashley Dawson takes readers inside the popular struggles for environmental liberation in the global south.

These communities, among the most vulnerable too, but also least responsible for the climate crisis, have long been fighting to protect imperiled worlds.

Today, as the world's forest spurn, and our oceans acidify.

Grassroots movements are tenaciously defending the environmental commons and forging just and sustainable ways of living on Earth.

Find environmentalism from below at Haymarketbooks.org, where readers in the U.S. And UK receive free shipping on orders over $25 and £20 respectively.

Welcome to The Dig, a podcast from Jackfin magazine.

My name is Daniel Denver, and I'm broadcasting from Providence, Rhode Island.

This is the 3rd episode of Thawora, the dig's new series on 20th century Arab politics, with historian Abdel Razak Takriti.

Thawara is Arabic for revolution.

It's a word that contains historical multitude, diverse political radicalisms and revolts that have swept across Arab lands over the last century.

Today's episode with Abdel Razak, Abid for short, is about the post-colonial Arab state system that had emerged in the Middle East by the mid 20th century.

Once again, a huge asterisk next to post-colonial because, obviously, Palestine was shattered by Zionist settler colonialism in 1948.

Britain continued to exercise enormous imperial power across the Arabian peninsula, up through Egypt and over to Jordan and Iraq.

And all the while, American imperial power began to expand across Arab lands, beginning with Saudi Arabia.

In short, in this episode, Abid and I go country by country, often deep into the 19th century, or even earlier.

And the reason we're doing that is so that you all have a clear map of the region in your head, when, in the next episode, we turn to the 1950s into the real focus of this series, the dizzying 2 decade long heyday of nationalist, Bathist, communist, and various other radical and revolutionary movements and parties.

Lastly, I want to lay out some Hashemite context that I think would be helpful as you listen to the episode.

We keep touching upon Hussein bin Ali, the Sharif of Mecca, who, in exchange for British promises that he would become king of a pan Arab kingdom, led the Arab revolt against the Ottomans during World War I. The Sharif was, of course, sold out by the British, who put Arab Ottoman lands under the colonial rule of the mandate system, while Palestine was handed over to Zionist settler colonialism.

Hussein bin Ali was even ousted from the Hijaz, his kingdom in the eastern Arabian Peninsula, when the British, and yet another act of betrayal, allowed the expanding Saudi state to conquer it.

The British did give his sons their own kingdoms.

Abdullah became the Hashemitemir of Transjordan, later the king of Jordan.

Meanwhile, Faisal was ousted by the French in 1920, after less than a year as monarch of the Arab kingdom of Syria.

After that, the British created for him a new throne in Iraq.

Oh, and I'll also say that overall, Seria gets rather short shrift in this episode compared to the deep dives on pretty much every other country in the region.

Do not worry, we will be talking about Syrian history a lot, and we'll return to Syria big time in upcoming episodes when we talk about the bath parties early rise to power there.

Before we get the podcast started.

This series with Ahid is creating something that simply does not exist in the English language.

A comprehensive overview of 20th century Arab politics with a particular focus on the Arab radicalisms that exploded across the region in the 1950s and 60s.

You listen to the dig, because on this and so many other matters, we provide the sort of smart in-depth analysis that you simply can't find elsewhere.

And we do all of it without any paywall because we want the maximum number of people possible to listen.

This is, above all else, a political education project.

And the reason we can do that is because listeners who can afford to support the dig and want to support the dig, do so at patreon.com slash the dig.

Contribute now and be a part of making this podcast a weekly reality that's free to anyone who wants to check it out, depending on where you live and how much you donate.

We also have mugs, books, tote bags. And everyone who contributes, gets our excellent weekly newsletter by Ben maybe, delivered straight to your email inbox.

Click the link in the show notes and contribute.

That's P-A-T-R-E-O-N.com slash the dig.

Okay, here's Abdel Razaktakriti, who teaches history at Rice University.

A scholar of Arab and Palestinian revolutionary movements.

He's the author of Monsoon Revolution, Republicans, Sultans, and Empires in Oman, and the co-author of The Palestinian Revolution Digital Humanities website, an incredible resource that will be back online soon.

We should close out that story you were telling and talk about what sort of Arab states emerged across the region in the wake of formal colonial rule, as the mandatory British and French seeded power or at least the appearance of power to post-colonial regime.

Again, a huge asterisk next to the post there.

But what sort of regime's worthies that emerged.

These republics in formerly French Syrian, Lebanon, monarchies in formerly British ruled Iraq, Jordan, Egypt, and then also the monarchies of the Arabian Peninsula, and British influenced and controlled Saudi Arabia, Oman, Kuwait, the trucial states.

Also, there's Bahrain, Qatar, South Yemen, which remained under direct British rule into the late 60s, early 70s.

Palestine, of course, was mostly seized by Western back Zionist, or Colonialist in 1948.

I know this is a huge question, but lay out the regional landscape of states and regimes, the geopolitical order, as it stood in the wake of the mandate period and the Nakba.

Of course, we've alluded to the fact that throughout the mandate years, there had been serious contestation and open revolts against the mandate system, uh, we've seen revolts taking place, In Iraq, in Syria, and in Palestine.

The colonial powers had to adjust their policy to some extent, but their preferred method was to always give greater space for local powers that were going to work with them and that they saw as being more in alignment with their agenda.

Now, That leads to, eventually, a situation where by the time we get to the Second World War, the whole regional map was going to change.

It was clear.

And the colonial powers had to adjust to the post 2nd World War realities.

But their preferred choice in every zone was not to work with the radical wings that have challenged them.

But to work with figures that may have opposed their presence, but were willing to work with them.

The emphasis was on the postwar calculations.

That meant an attempt to perpetuate colonialism without direct colonials.

So, uh, it's what people would call in the theoretical literature, referring to Kwaminakruma's term, uh, it's neo colonials, essentially.

They were preparing neo-colonialist agenda.

Syria and Lebanon in independence.

That's where the neo-colonialism was weakest in a way because they gained independence in a way that was almost forced upon the French.

The French were an occupied nation during the war.

They came out of the war being the weakest of the great powers in a way, when it came to deciding on colonial questions, and the British had to force through processes even during the war itself. That eventually facilitated for their exit from Syria and Lebanon.

That does not mean that they had 0 influence in those states.

Certainly in Lebanon, they continued to have influence because of historic connections with certain communities that they had strong connection with.

In Syria, for example, they lost a lot of influence.

And and they were, France no longer could intervene in Syrian politics in a meaningful way after it was forced out.

However, the Syrian nearly started Syrian government had to work with the West quote unquote, and certainly with the British initial.

Now, internal balance in Syria is very complicated, and we'll get to that story later on, eventually, the initial policy of working with the British gets overthrown, Americans initiate cool there, the 1948 war in Palestine, the Nakiba changes everything.

We can talk about that later on.

That's for another episode.

Followed by Nakbus followed by many, many coups in Syria.

Absolutely.

It becomes like almost a permanent feature of Syrian political life.

Now, in the case of Jordan.

We have a situation where You have a stable formula.

Because a monarchy is established that has a direct dependency on the empire.

The direct dependency is financial, but it's also military.

And that has serious implications.

The, the, the army in Jordan, uh, which was key to the formation of the state.

And key to the formation of national identity even in that country.

And there is a big literature.

There's a book called Colonial Effects by Zef Masad that talks about this, okay?

Military is so important, but the military is led by the British.

Now, the military in Jordan also is implicated in Palestinian politics.

And so is the Jordanian monarch.

And they play roles that are connected to the British agenda there.

There are communications between the Gerjanian monarchy, its military force, the Arab bleaching, right, which is under British command, the British empire, imperial powers, and the Zionists, who conspire, essentially, in the Nakba, to an extent, and also there are military conflicts between Jordanian forces and Zionist and the West Bank, but ultimately, the Jordanians with British connivance allow for Israel to be established on 78% of historic Palestine while ceding the West Bank to Jordanian control.

Correct.

Here, though, I want us to understand the logic here, because sometimes, again, I warn against just purely conspiratorial thinking way of looking at it.

We have to understand it structurally, and we have to understand the ideology underlying this.

Because there is an ideology, actually.

Of collaboration with imperialism.

And this is something that you see actually increasingly in the historical memoirs that are coming from Jordanian officials and from other ruling families and and people connected to them that have worked with the British and later on the Americans, of course.

So the Arab bride often talks about this.

They see themselves as realists.

Okay, they will tell you, look, the world is run by imperial powers, uh, you want to get as beneficial a treatment possible for these emerging uh, nations, And it's not advisable to clash with the powerful.

When you're so weak, you're still nascent, your states are not formed.

You can benefit from them.

You'll get like aid if you're in their orbit.

You'll get support.

And you won't lose as much territory as you would if you clash with.

That was essentially, uh, Abdullah the 1st philosophy, and it was also the philosophy of others that uh, uh, exist to this day, by the way.

All the all the political forces that work with the Americans in the region.

They're not necessarily just purely traitors.

And I know this is difficult conversation to have because for anybody who was radical or for anybody who was actually generally anti-colonialists, this philosophy runs against every principle that they believe in, and that myself included, okay?

But as a historian, it's important.

To also clarify it.

And for us to fully understand it.

And not to simply think that it's some casual decision on the part of somebody, because they're a traitor, because they're a collaborator, by nature, collaboration, and happens.

As a result of structural factors, class factors, but also ideological factors.

So this is essentially the conservative ideology that was prevailing at the time.

And in the case of Jordan, in the case of Jordan, which is an extremely sparsely populated country before the Nakpa, if they can get that chunk of historic Palestine and add it to their country, then that's, and that's the best they can do.

That's the strategic calculus on the king's part.

So, so, so the king, Abdullah, the first, who was previously Amir Abdullah, the, uh, he initially his ambition was the whole of Syria.

He had, he had, you know, departed from the hezaz at a moment when, it was clear that his brother Faisal had been ousted, and he started, his project was to expand into Siri.

That's why, uh, in the early moments, Jordan became, when he 1st took over the Emirate, in the early 1920s, uh, he started cultivating relationships with all the leaders of the Syrian independence.

And by the way, during the Syria, great revolt.

He gave protection and refuge to a lot of the leaders of the revolt, was sought refuge in his in his emirate at the time.

That's because he thought that he would be able to establish a strong national coalition under him.

And he could then use to establish an Arab kingdom under his, of course, rule across the entirety of Syria.

That was ambition.

Now, his problem was that the British were not going to back him enough to do that against their allied friends.

This is about great power politics, not about the British wanting to back their client.

He had proven to the British that he would be a good client.

And his philosophy was that you had to work with the British again, because that brings you, you know, whatever limited material leverage you need to be able to establish central power.

The British were a source of money.

They gave him an annual subsidy, but also, uh, they were a source of arms and training, and there was protection, without them, it would not exist.

So, he understood that part very well, and that's the structural relationship that he had with them. Similar to the relationship that other rulers of that sort had with the Burs, including his brother Faisal, although of course Faisal was ruling a country that was quickly developing oil resources.

So it had other income and it was a larger country, much richer agriculture, et cetera.

But in the case of King Abdullah, his dependence was very high on the British.

His ambitions were bigger than that dependence than what that dependence could afford.

Now, the minute he starts realizing that, He doesn't have a pathway to ruling Syria.

And that becomes clear even after the French uh, begin to uh, weaken there and, you know, in the context of the 2nd World War, because the national leaderships in Syria don't want it.

You know, by then you have all the major political figures in Syria.

That had fought against the French, whether in reformist ways or in more radical ways, we're not largely in favor of a, Restoration of Hashemite monarchical rule there.

Certainly not under Abdul.

So, when it became clear that that option wasn't gonna work, his best bet is Palestine.

And that's basically southern Syria.

Jordan and Palestine are historically southern Syria.

So, In Palestine, he already had a strong network that he'd been investing in from the 20s.

Essentially, all the political figures that were against the Mufti.

Uh, he had relations with.

He could not influence the Mufti because Mufti represents the mainstream national current, and it's strong, and he has a big network around it.

But he could influence the opposition.

So he uses this opposition. To build a power base, In Palestine, and essentially, it relies on a set of very influential West Bank families.

The Zabari is in Hebron, the Tuchans and Neb list, and the Sashibi is in Jerusalem. To essentially establish a base of support that he could use.

To convince the British.

That, He would be able to govern that bit of Palestine.

In a manner that's suitable to their interests, and The British, of course, don't want the Mufti in because they see the Mufti as a threat to their whole program.

MFT does not want any part of Palestine to be lost to settler colonists.

And that's enough for the British to see him as somebody that they can't work with.

But of course, they, Forced them out after 36, they, you know, they, they were not going to entertain any genuinely anti-colonial project, even if we take seriously, of course, the reality of the Mufti having tried to work initially within a colonial framework, but eventually his own class position, his own background, his own reality, forced him to take a stronger stats.

So Abdullah was was a convenient option for them.

And that meant uh, that he could also, work with the Zionists over partitioning the zoo.

Not because he believed in partition or he believed in Zions.

Abdallah is not a Zions.

Nobody in this region, including the biggest client state leaders that worked with the British. Of them are Zionists by default.

They all know that Zionism is illegitimate.

In their worldviews, it isn't legitimate.

Okay, but.

But they consider themselves pragmatic.

Yeah, they show themselves as pragmatic realists and they actually criminalize.

Others that resisted it, they accused them of losing everything in the name of protecting everything.

So, so they, they say it's not all or nothing.

Do some negotiations.

You have to appreciate the balance of power.

The balance of power is the empire is in charge.

You ally completely with the empire and you get whatever scrambles it gives you.

This is their philosophy.

Speaking of the Hashemite kingdom, moving eastward.

What is the situation like in Iraq where Abdullah's brothers is governing.

So in Iraq, the situation is trickier for Abdullah's brother, because 1st of all, Iraq is a richer place, as I mentioned, it's a bit, it's a much bigger place, more populated place.

Erot is 5 times the size of Jordan, roughly.

It's also more ethnically and religiously diverse.

Jordan has mainly 2 religious groupings.

There is a clear, synonymously majority, and there is a Christian minority there.

And they both have had very good relations, historically, and they coexist just fine.

There's no threat to the overall social order coming from religious difference.

There's no threat to the world's social order coming from ethnic difference.

It's almost entirely an air population.

Now, you do have some refugee populations that have come there from earlier periods, they play key roles, like the Circassians, the Armenians and others, they're important for the Jordanian national fabric, you know, the Chechens and the Dalestanis.

These populations did not pit themselves against Arabism or Arabism.

In fact, they kind of became Arabis in a way while retaining, of course, their national identities and characters.

But like, for example, Armenians and Jordan are not working against Arabness or Arab identity or they don't see themselves as being in tension with it.

They have their own schools and churches and so on, and they have a clearly distinct community, but they, They speak Arabic fluently.

They are part of the, Social fabric.

Same for the Circassians and others.

So, Iraq is different.

Iraq, you have, 1st of all, uh, you, a great deal of uh, religious diversity.

There's a very large CA population, there's a large, uh, Sunni population, and then you have multiple other, smaller sects, including lots of Jews at the states, lots of Christians, uh, of many different varieties, and, uh, in addition to that, you have ethnic diversity with at least 2 key major ethnicities, uh, urban and Kurdish.

You have the proximity to Iran, and contested areas with Iran, in key, in key areas as well, especially around Satan Arab.

So, All of this creates for a very complicated social reality and also political reality and geostrategic reality that's very different.

I should note, however, and I should warn, against, projecting, to theologically post-U.S. Invasion realities and discussions on the past.

Because despite this diversity.

There was always a formula to make it work.

The idea that GA versus Sunni is a permanent cause of conflict, for example, is simply not true.

There, there were always the elements of uh, joint uh, interests.

There were many figures that emphasized the national unity.

Uh, there was a strong communist party that emphasized their class-based politics.

There is, there is all sorts of dimensions to the rock reality.

They are far more complex.

The big Kurdish clash with the state.

Uh, which which note, 1st of all, there's a, a Kurdish class with the British, of course, empire, and they participate in their rebellion and Iraq in substantial ways, and they see themselves as being uh, left out. Of the nation state structure that was established by the British and the French in the context of the 1st World War.

You know, they really get, they're victims of sex picot and and all the processes that happen in the Paris peace conference and and so on.

The activation of Kurdish nationalism happens later.

Its relationship with the Iraqi state is very complex and not always hostile.

Initially, of course, the big Kurdish experiment at independence does not happen in Iraq.

It happens in the in Iran and with the Republic of Mahabad.

But then, It's an Iraqi figure that's involved in that, Mulla Barazani.

And he ends up being exiled in the Soviet Union, of course.

Now it doesn't come back to Iraq until much later until actually the revolution of 58 is brought back.

So there are potential tensions that are potentially latent.

But they don't always become manifest.

And some of these tensions did not necessarily have to lead to the realities that they led to.

And here I really should note that when we talk about history, some historians believe that some things were inevitable.

I'm not one of these people.

I really take seriously, Marxist view that men, and I would add women, of course, like everybody, humans, make their own reality, okay?

Like the, there is a role for agency and history.

But of course, there are structural realities out there that restrict that and and that's why we have to discuss the interplay between between the structural and the voluntarist, whenever we talk about any of these stories, including in Iraq.

Turning west before we get to the Gulf and then to Egypt, we should unpack what sort of unusual system the French imposed in Lebanon.

Yeah, so what's interesting about Lebanon, Daniel, is, 1st of all, there has always been an attempt, at least since the 19th century.

There is this French pressure to establish a separate political reality for Christians in Lebanon, and certainly Christian communities that they're connected with, which is primarily the Maronite community.

The French present themselves to their communities, their protector, and their sponsor, and of course, missionary schools.

It is a Catholic community, so France has this relationship based on that.

And of course, this goes back to colonial projects in the Ottoman Empire.

They always relied on each colonial power, claiming protection over a minority population within that.

So the French, their way of intervening in Ottoman politics was to claim that they were protectors of the Catholics there and between the Maronites.

The British claim to be protectors of Jews and Jews, populations and, you know, whatever small Protestant minorities they were able to establish in the empire.

Russians, of course, claim the special relationship to Orthodox Christian communities.

So, this goes into the question of the politics of minorities and how they intersect with colonial projects in the region.

And we've seen that, of course, there was a serious anti-colonial current that was very much led by people who belonged to minorities, so we should not ever accept this idea, just because the colonial power claim, that it was representing minorities, that, you know, all minorities just followed suit.

However, those sort of relationships created a situation whereby a country like France could exert special influence in certain areas.

And that was definitely the case in Mount Lebanon, where you did have a compact minority there.

The Marinites are concentrated there, and they have many villages in which they are the only sect or maybe in some cases they're mixed with some Dru's neighbors or so on, but there is a feature there that is sociologically different from the surrounding bigger Syrian space at the stage, which is predominantly a Sunni Muslim space with major Christian minorities.

So, That that complexity.

That that diversity was manageable actually for many years and worked for many years.

So, When we look at Lebanon, French have a certain vision for it that runs against this whole system.

They want to essentially separate the Christian minority there from the rest of the territory, and it's the place where you have the closest thing to a Christian plurality anywhere.

In terms of the in demographic terms in that part of the world.

So you could potentially, if you're a colonial administrator, Dream of establishing a Christian state there, for example.

And it could potentially encourage local thinking along these lines.

That such thinking would be implausible and would not work in, let's say, Palestine or in Damascus or in, uh, uh, Jordan.

These are areas where you do have many Christians, but they're uh, they're integrated into broader social fabric.

But in Lebanon, you could convince people of such a project.

That style of thought, eventually, leads to, The reality that we saw, there, of course, there's civil wars that influence this, there's the history of the Matsarifia, there's many different, it's sectarianism is created, it's not primordial.

But my point is, at the time we get to the mandate period, they run into the reality, that a project of establishing a Christian state, solely Christian state is impossible, because there are other groups living in that space.

But what they could do is try to establish a Christian dominated state. Through placating some of the other groups and creating some formula that allows for everybody to somehow have a seat at the table, except communities that did not have the class position. To be able to uh, inhere the intersection between state sect and class is important.

And I'm referring it specifically to Shia.

Yeah, the Shia is significantly the poor peasantry and working class of the country where Maronites are not exclusively rich and the rich are not exclusively Maronites, but the ruling class does tend to be Maronite.

So the ruling class historically was not merit.

I should note this.

Until the 19th century, Maronites were mostly poor peasants.

What happens is Muhammad Ali is a campaign in Lebanon, and his entry to the entirety of Syria changes many local dynamics.

We didn't get a chance to talk about this, Daniel.

But in the 1830s was the 1830s was a revolutionary decade in the Middle East in many ways, because you have this very ambitious Ottoman governor, coming from Egypt, taking over the whole of Greater Assyria and possibly marching towards Istanbul.

That was his plan.

Okay, but in the meantime, is doing major local changes.

Political changes.

And he's undermining the old willing elite in these areas so that he could remove Ottoman influence and strengthen his own influence.

In the case of Mount Lebanon, the Maronite peasantry starts rebelling against the old Ottoman landlords, many of whom came from Drew's backgrounds, not marinade backgrounds, and who had fled Muhammad Ali's advance to they sought refuge in the Ottoman capital until things get better.

Now they come back, they find that their lands are taken and so on.

That leads to a clash, along with other factors like missionary education, like French encouragement.

I mean, there's so many complex intricacies to the story.

But essentially, you have 2 civil wars that come out of this clash between, initially, Drusen and Merlin.

With time, however, you have the emergence of a Maronite bourgeoisie, you have the emergence of a Maronite finance class.

Even though historically, the centers of finance and the centers of trade and centers of wealth, where, of course, the cities.

And the cities are predominantly Sunni Muslim, with substantial Christian Orthodox backgrounds.

And so, Christian Orthodox communities in Lebanon, for example, historically, we're wealthier for Denver Knight communities.

But changes happen, in the colonial period, in the Matsarifia period, sociological changes.

And again, I'm not the best person to comment on this, but I know about it from established scholarship.

Let's turn now to the golf where there is a strong British colonial presence and a lot of monarchies.

Yeah, Daniel, the golf is an area that was subjected to British colonialism very early on.

And as I mentioned earlier, that colonialism started in 1798 in that part of the world, in the context of the Napoleonic wars.

And so for a long time, it was managed from the British government in India.

So if if you were to want to research the politics of the Gulf before the independence of India, you would have to actually go through the records of the British government there.

It's a very rich repository.

And the way they did manage the region, I corresponded to that fact.

It was designed to operate as a buffer zone for India.

And the British employees, what you could call a British Monroe doctrine there, essentially.

They were saying no other power has the right to come to this area.

We will manage the foreign affairs of this part of the world, and we will manage the major uh, trading uh, uh, routes in this part of the world.

However, will give the local ruling structures, the domestic authorities within their territories.

That arrangement essentially operated on the coast.

In the interior of the Arabian Peninsula, the British tended to operate through a complex series of alliances with existing tribal leaderships and structures, as well as with more centralizing structures like the movement that are developed around the Al Saud.

So they had deliberations with them.

They had understandings with them.

Sometimes they had conflicts with them.

But they always find a way to prevent them from overtaking the coastal areas.

And if we want to understand the politics of the Gulf today.

We have to remember that had it not been for the British, uh, being established on the coast, in Kuwait, in, uh, Bahrain, in Qatar, in the Trucial States, which later became the United Emirates, and in Oman.

Those areas almost definitely would have been part of the modern day kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

It would have been undertaken.

They would have been overtaken by the Al Saoud and the religious revivalist movement.

That was connected to them.

That's why I always warn people about mixing the ruling structure in the Saudi state with the ruling structure in the other smaller Gulf monarchies.

They come from different social bases.

And I can say very definitely that the Saudi ruling structure had deeper local roots, then the ruling families along the coast, and for a variety of reasons, that I had to do with the fact that without the British, those ruling families on the coast would have had a serious set of crises, and would have would have found it very difficult to perpetuate their rules, their rule.

And Saudis, on the other hand, had a local movement supporting them.

Had a religious ideology particular to them that could propel their project, but at a certain point, the expansion of their project depended on establishing relationships with Britain.

And eventually, it was Britain that allowed them to formalize their control over uh, the majority of the Arabian peninsula, especially when it did not protect the hezas from falling under Saudi rule.

So they left the Sharif Hussein, their older ally, who had rebelled against the Ottomans on their behalf, to fall prey to the Saudi control.

That's why the Saudi state expanded. Jazz being the western portion of Saudi Arabia where Mecca and Medina are.

Yes, it's a thin strip that runs parallel to the Red Sea, roughly starting in the southern part of Jordan, which is the southernmost part of Greater Syria, and it sends all the way down.

So, uh, that used to be the Hijaz, the core of the Hijaz, of course, is the, is around the holy cities of Medina and Mecca.

Uh, but it's, um, uh, its main port was Jedda, of course.

Now, that was an area that had long been controlled by the Ottomans.

It had an Ottoman culture.

It was a very cosmopolitan area.

And as a recent book by Rosie Bashir emphasizes, Mecca itself had a fascinating cultural life prior to the to its fall to the Saudi state.

The Saudi states begins to transform everything around it, begins to appropriate everything around it.

And in some ways, it develops through appropriation.

It's definitely a commonwealth by acquisition.

It's definitely built on a very coercive relationship with its surroundings.

But as it swallows up.

Everything around it in the uh, Arabian peninsula.

It also acquires some of the features of what it what it took under its command and control.

Now, had it not been for the British.

It would have taken over the eastern coastal strip of the Airbnb Peninsula.

Had it not been for British intervention.

It would not have been able to take the Western part.

The British decided to, they bid on the, uh, Al Sal, but it could definitely generate greater military mobilization than any other force in the Arab infinitism because they had a religious ideology that could mobilize.

So provide a brief snapshot then of the golf states and their ruling regimes in, say, 1949.

So 1949 is a very easy year to understand the ghost states and the ruling regimes because pretty much what you have is you have the Alzaba in Kuwait, they're under British control, but Kuwait is the 1st state to really benefit from major oil development amongst those states on the coast.

I mean, Bahrain was the was the 1st to start production, but the amount of oil in Kuwait is so big that we see like a big jump in its economic status starting in that period, but really, really, uh, you know, by the 50s, it becomes clear that Kuwait is going to be at a different level of wealth altogether.

So you had a major expansion in education and infrastructure and so on.

And that produces a different set of political outlooks in Kuwait than in other parts of the Gulf.

Kuwait and Bahrain, I should note, always had a very dynamic political life.

These were areas where education came relatively early, in comparison with other Gulf states.

These were areas that had very strong trading linkages that were historic, with both long distance trade with India, but also they had strong connections to the Ottoman empire and to Iran.

These were areas that had a wealthy merchant class, even before the age of oil.

So, that wealthy merchant class facilitated the creation of civic structures in these areas.

And that's why as somebody who started studying the Gulf, one of the, one of the, uh, main things that I, that I contributed to in that field, and that, um, you know, I'm just a small part of that, but, um, you know, but it is a trend, um, is to actually emphasize. That there was an intellectual life in that part of the world before.

It wasn't just a wasteline.

There was a social life.

There was a cultural life.

You know, I really wanted to emphasize that in my early work.

Or was a vibrant political life.

And in Kuwait, we saw that really intimately.

Kuwait, for example, uh, was a place in which the uh, Arab clandestine movement operated. Which later became very important for the movement of Arab nationalists. Which we'll get into in a lot more depth later on.

Yes.

It was a place where you also had early formation of educational structures that were geared towards anti-colonial thinking.

So the interesting thing about that place, is that the educational infrastructure was started by intellectuals who were reformist in Outlook.

And these intellectuals often came from mercantile families that were in competition with their ruling family.

They never accepted, uh, the dwelling family has full say over the local affairs of Kuwait.

That's why often people speak of Kuwait, even within Kuwait itself.

As being a product of a sort of a social contract between the Al Sabah and the merchants of the town.

It was almost like a mercantile model, where the rulers facilitate the commercial activities, and that's their job, commercial activities of the traders, because it was a trading port.

That was its importance.

But the traders had an independent economic base from the rulers initiative.

Now, later on, of course, and this is well established in the literature, you know, people like Joel Crystal and others have talked about it in detail.

Later on, oil changes that relationship because you have the ruling family, is given control over the oil, essentially, by the British.

And that becomes a formula across the gulf.

Once you give the control over the main source of revenue, which is oil.

To their ruler.

Their position, vis a vis, their merchants, vis a vis, local society, becomes incredibly powerful.

And it's a situation where it's almost almost impossible to overthrow them. Through traditional means.

That's why when people say, uh, oh, what explains uh, perpetual dominance, ruling families in the Gulf, why are they always in power, why doesn't it change?

I'm like, well, these are small societies in terms, I'm talking small in terms of population size, in which great wealth was found through this natural resource, but in which the colonial power and concentrated that wealth, in the hands of the ruler and the ruling family, and then they get to control society through them.

Let's move southeast down the Persian Gulf, which would bring us next to Bahrain.

So, if we look at Bahrain, we have also an active political life, similar to Kuwait, they actually struck oil first.

So they were able to offer some of these major development projects early on.

And they also had an active exposure.

To places like Iran and Iraq, active exposure, to places that had labor movements active within them.

So that's why also you found the phenomena of uh, strikes, actions, uh, labor mobilizations going on in Bahrain, fairly early on.

That takes place in the, in the oil company, in Bapco.

You know, you find this really, really active labor life going on.

Now, of course, in discussions today, most people emphasize Bahrain as a sectarian space.

It's really hard to resist that kind of analysis in contemporary times.

Because there's a Sunni, because there's a Sunni ruling family, a Sunni monarchy that has actively repressed a Shia majority whenever it's risen up to demand democratic rights.

Demographically, the majority population, Bahrain, happens to follow the Shia Islam, it's called of Islam, and the ruling family, as you correctly noted, happens to be Sony.

The ruling family came in the 18th century, like the Al Sabah.

You know, many of these willing families came as a result of 18th century dynamics.

There was a pattern called or tube migrations.

They came from the from that tribal background.

And as a result of factor's internal to nest, there was a push factor towards the coast that ended up producing a new political reality along the coast.

There's always been a relationship between Naz, the interior of the urban peninsula and the coast.

When there is a major sociological set of pressures inside, you often had this outward movement towards the cause.

Now, the main characteristic distinguishing the population of a place like Bahrain, and the ruling family in the 18th century, was that the population was settled, and they were practicing agriculture.

Whereas the ruling family could command a mobile marshal unit, essentially, it was a fighting force that could extract, as a result, taxation.

And that's very important to understand.

Sometimes people overemphasize a sectarian dimension in that 18th century moment.

And I should note, it was not untraditional, or not uncommon, to have families that either came from Bedouin backgrounds or had or were at the apex of a coalition that depended on a Bedouin fighting force, and that could mobilize, therefore, armed raids and so on.

It was not uncommon in the Arabian Peninsula, but also in parts of Iraq and the Greater Assyria, for them to have exploitative relationships with local peasantry.

In the case of behind that local peasantry happen to be Shiite in terms of its faith.

And the peasants are not fighters traditionally.

They might be able to fight to in local context.

Whereas when you have these big like conquests like that, they're too busy working in the land and, you know, so so there was an exploitative relationship setup.

It was a relationship with dominance.

And that caused long-term tensions, of course.

Both of a class nature, but later on, especially in the colonial period, the sectarian aspects sometimes got mobilized.

Because the sectarian, the sectarian identities, but can become the modality in which these class relations are lived perhaps.

Well, or it becomes a way for colonialism to produce a new gaze, which is actually the latest research has documented that extensively.

There's a fantastic book by Omar Shihabi, uh, on this, uh, that I really, I think uh, people uh, people should uh, should read.

And it is about actually specifically this question of colonial modernity in Bahrain and contestation around it.

It's a, it's an excellent piece of radical scholarship by a radical bargain scholar.

So I really recommend it.

Now, sometimes people misunderstand the conversation when actually, when scholars who are influenced by Marxist analysis, emphasize the class, and they warn against singularly talking about sect at the expense of class.

So, But I want to explain this very clearly here.

It's undoubtable that the current regime in Bahrain has a really terrible sectarian policy to it.

Okay?

There's no question about it.

But, it's very clear also that this has to be read in relation to class dynamics in a previous period.

Let's move down the coast. In terms of 1949 to Qatar.

Yeah, so, so, Qatar, uh, it's an interesting story because, of course, uh, the Barani ruling regime sees itself as the, as actually the original uh, rulers there.

But of course, one of the classic British methods in this part of the world.

And this is how the map of that part of the world developed is, is that they presented themselves as arbiters as people that manage the peace and impose peace when necessary.

Whenever there is a local conflict in the gulf.

That's why when you hear terms like the crucial coast, that's in reference to the British imposing a truce, a permanent truce amongst the rulers of these areas.

They were imposing these treaties, limited conflict.

And by that, They're actually, what they're doing is extending their control.

They're not really, it's not about them being peacemakers or anything like that.

These are not British colonial officials were not hippies, okay?

They were, they were not concerned with keeping the peace.

Yeah.

They wanted to control the space.

So, Qatar is a classic example of that.

But whenever you have a conflict like that, and that's why, of course, you know, the Bahrani rulers feel really bad about Qatar in particular, because it ended up being an area that they used to have some influence over control over even in some in many ways.

But it turns out to be now a big repository of gas and it's far richer than Bahrain and a family that they consider to be minor in comparison to them.

What do you remember here?

This is about also clan feuds.

So ruling plans were trying to establish your control over different parts of these territories.

I will incline that the El Khalifa is to consider to be minor to them.

Uh, or inferior to them.

The Althani is now far, far richer and has much greater, say, in world affairs.

That was created by the British.

They decided as a result of of that conflict that they ruled in favor of the Al Thani having dominance there.

So they ended up having the control over the Qatar peninsula.

Now, of course, what's also important to remember here is whenever you look at any of these structures, you should examine also the relationship with the nicety interior and the relationship with the al Saud.

And initially, Qatar had a good relationship.

And when it came to the actual religious background, they wholeheartedly embraced the message of Muhammad bin Abdul Ahab was, of course, uh, the main preacher of the, of the, that, that, that created, or played the key role in the creation of the 1st Saudi State.

Let's keep moving down the Persian Gulf Coast to the crucial states, the British aligned trucial states, the British dominated trucial states, which today are the United Arab Emirates, and also, south of that, to Oman, because we can't understand those histories separately.

Okay, so if we if we go back in history, we'll find that in the late 18th century, early 19th century, 2 of these locals you mentioned, uh, had particular significance, uh, militarily and economically.

Russell Hemme and Sarja were the centers of the Kasimi Alliance, uh, which was, of course, uh, a major maritime force, and a major trading force in the Indian Ocean and the Gulf.

The British accused them of piracy.

Even though, actually, if you look at it historically, and this was a point that was made by the current ruler of Sardio, comes, of course, Kasimi lineage and there's written a book on the title of the myth of Arab piracy in the Gulf.

He's saying, well, from our perspective, it wasn't piracy at all.

The British were the wheel pirates because they were stealing the trade routes that we had long dominated.

And suddenly you have, uh, these colonial companies, uh, British India company coming in, and they're undermining established local Indian ocean trading patterns.

Piracy does some of the same sort of political ideological work as terrorism.

Absolutely.

Not just in this part of the Arab region.

We know that also in the so-called, what was referred to as the Barbary Coast, which of course is not how we call it, but in the Maghreb, in the western side of the Arab region.

Piracy was also used for imperial purposes.

And we know very well that one of the uh, big um, early instances of American purialism, of course, was was the bombing.

That, of course, like the, the, possibly one of the long distance naval operations, the earliest long distance naval operations of an imperialist character, US imperialist character took place there.

So that should be of interest to US listeners.

You were looking out how Sharja and Russell Kaima, 2 of the emirates that are probably least known in the West today, were in the 18th century, the most powerful and significant because of their naval power.

How do these, what are today, 7 emirates part of the UAE, how do they become the trucial states?

Now, when you look at all of these states, their main connection was with Oman, actually.

And in many ways, that's why it used to be called the crucial Oman coast.

The center of power, traditionally there was mascot.

So it's very important to understand that.

There is an intimate relationship between this crucial state, what is now the United Emirates, used to be effectively within the zone of influence of Omah.

And in many ways, it's some of its own citizens today, used to demand back in the days when they were active political movements in that territory, used to demand a greater Roman project, for example.

They wanted reunification with a man because they saw themselves as being culturally politically and economically tied to it.

So it's very important to understand that connection.

And the military force that the British end up raising to back up the Emirati regimes is the Trucial Oman Scouts.

Correct.

And again, like, um, British themselves had recognized, they am a man in reference to that cause, because it was seen as an extension of that.

It's basically the southern part of the Arabian Peninsula, in the southern part of the Gulf, has its own dynamics, and Oman is the major center of these dynamics.

They all revolved around around Oma, which was, of course, a very important Indian Ocean Empire, for a long time, but especially after the Omanis expelled the Portuguese in the 17th century from mascot.

So it was the 1st place to experience serious Western colonialism in the eastern part of the Arab world, and the 1st place to witness a successful expulsion.

Of colonialism, But also, in a way, its replacement by a different kind of imperial system that was local to the Indian Ocean, but in which the Armanis became the dominant power.

They chased Portuguese around the Indian Ocean and managed to acquire some of the areas that they had previously controlled.

What we have then is, you know, a man, you have a new dynasty that gets established after the 17th century and the expulsion of the of the Portuguese, but eventually you get into a civil war in the 18th century.

And really, I mean, the defining feature of the Gulf and the Airbane Peninsula in its entirety, Daniel.

And this is something that's very interesting to observe.

All of the ruling families in that region, pretty much are a product of 18th century developments and turmoil that took place.

Uh, the Omani ruling family today, the Albu Said, come out of a very difficult civil war that took place in Oman in the 18th century.

And the main moiety division, between the 2 big tribal alliances in Oman, also took shape in that period in the 18th century as a result of major symbol, war or as a manifestation of it.

That also applies to Saudi Arabia.

The El Saoud came out of 18th century dynamics, and the revivalist movement that got established there.

The various ruling houses in the Northern Gulf came out of 18th century dynamics, or 2 migrations that we referred to earlier.

And almost all of the southern coast, uh, what is what is now the United Arab Emirates, was also similarly, you know, took shape in the 18th century, the relations of power in the specific dynasties that took control.

So 18th century is a very important century for understanding that region.

And the British made sure because they arrived in the 19th century.

They essentially fossilized the existing structures.

They made them very difficult to remove.

And anytime anybody tried to challenge them.

As was the case in, in a manner, elsewhere, they, they crack down.

And we will get into the struggle, the revolutionary struggle in Oman later on.

We will.

We will.

But in the Emirates, the British basically, initially had to establish their control through coercion, and they had to basically contain and domesticate the coalesce, the customs, that I, the alliance that I referred to earlier.

And essentially, they did that by burning their ships, burning their ports, attacking them, and destroying their naval power to the extent that they could.

They also carried out these activities, through encouraging collaboration, with other local rulers in the area that were competing with the coalesce.

In this case, for example, their 1st expedition against the colesm was done in cooperation with the local ruler of mascot, which is basically the capital of Oman today.

So this, we have this interesting situation.

Where through a combination of creating pliant client regimes, and exerting enormous force, relying on superior firepower, and a more developed navy, the British essentially, were able to generate new relationship of patron client control.

And the whole space becomes a playground for imperials.

At this point in 19, 1949, many of the trucial states, they are not the places we would think of today, things like diving for pearls are major parts of. The domestic economies or not when you think of Dubai in 2024.

This is not what it looked like at the time.

Of course not.

But also we should remember, there was old wealth in these parts of the world, partly because of the pearling industry that you refer to, which did generate income, and partly because of long distance trade with India, which did generate income, and various other Indian ocean trade activities.

In the case of Kuwait, of course, it is a different story.

They owned the merchants there also owned a huge agricultural lands, including dead bombs in Iraq.

So they had a different base of wealth in addition to the trading.

But in the case of the southern Gulf, they really got hit by the pearling crisis that came about as a result of a couple of factors.

First, there was a great depression, which really affected the market for luxury products like that, but also more importantly, the discovered discovery of these cultured perils and essentially artificial pearls that the Japanese developed in the 1930s.

And that really, really, really, uh, undermined the, uh, created economic crisis on a, on an unimaginable level.

In a part of the world, that did not have too many resources, uh, of an agricultural nature elsewhere.

People depended on the sea.

And the main luxury item that you could derive from the sea at that moment was pearls.

That's the best export product that you have.

So, you know, they still had other seafaring, related activities that could generate income and places like Dubai and elsewhere, which mainly trading, essentially transit, uh, trading and and making, um, you're not actually really exporting anything you're producing, but you're definitely transporting different items and you're acting as a linkage.

Between different parts of the world and your port.

But that's not enough to generate the sort of wealth we see today.

Nothing is enough to generate the sort of both we see today, except for a major, you know, boom like the oil boom that we saw a bit later.

Let's move south into, yeah, what is now Yemen, and at the time was divided between a Zaidi imamate in the north and the British colony of Aden and kind of surrounding regions under British control around Aden.

So, remember, Daniel, the same role that applies in the gulf applies to Ada.

The purpose of the British was to control the coast.

That's where they concentrated their energies.

That's where they concentrated their power.

Now, they really liked that, then, early on, because of its strategic nature.

If you are going to think like an empire, and you're going to take a look at the map of the British imperial world, You would understand why Aden is so important.

It lies at this interesting intersection of you can think of it almost like a, it's a, it's a junction.

It's a place where all the, if you think of the sea as roads, basically.

It's where all the roads intersect in a way.

And instead of gas station, these steamships need coaling stations.

Absolutely.

So you want, you want to stop in a place and what's a great suitable place to stop?

It's a place that has access to the Arabian Sea and the Indian Ocean and that has access nearby.

It's not too far.

The Red Sea.

Later on, once you have the Suez Canal that opens up a Mediterranean route.

Wonderful location on the way to India, which is actually the most important calculation for the British.

And Adan is really very much tied to Indian policy and throughout.

Uh, and later on it becomes useful also for airplanes uh, because you need to also refuel and you need like uh, uh, places for that.

So all of these major British locations become also the sites of aerodones and other concoctions of the sort that, so it's, it's really a major transportation hub.

And as we know, transportation hubs operate for a variety of reasons, and emerge for a variety of reasons, but usually access to certain waterways and the strategic location is the main fact.

That was the case also in the, by the way, United States, when you look at cities that operated in that way, there's a reason why the opening of Erie Canal and others leads to a certain boom in certain regions.

There's, you know, I'm sure urban historians can have addressed this in your podcast and elsewhere.

I say a rule applies here.

It becomes an important also site for the projection of British power, naval power.

So it's not just trade, it's about military control.

And you want, uh, the Royal Navy to have, uh, locations like that.

That's why, and then becomes such an important port. Becomes one of the busiest ports in the world, at certain, at certain point.

It's an incredible location.

But the British want to control the port.

And they don't want the hinterland though.

They just want to protect it from the hinterland.

They're like, it would be too expensive.

Too costly to go in and dominate the end to land, and there's no nothing that you get in return.

And this is something that sometimes people forget about imperialism, when they look at these maps of the British Empire or something, the, you know, the map is colored all in the colors of the British.

Actually, it's a much more complicated map.

There's a lot of like little patches here and there.

Like little dots that are scattered around.

That would be a more accurate portrayal in relation to this part of the world.

It's not like a contiguous big landmass in the in the Arabian peninsula.

What it is is lots of little dots that are protected from their hinterlands.

And think of them as islands almost.

Like everything around them is a big sea and then they're just like little islands.

And actually, the British treat them as such because they visit them by ship.

They don't do land convoys, they don't do armed movement of troops by land mainly in that part of the world.

It's the sea.

Yeah, and Yemen is not easygoing to rain either, as Egypt finds out later on, which we'll also discuss a bit.

It is not, is it going to rain?

It is also a place that has its own strong and very highly developed old trading networks, old social relations, Hadhramout, which is the so-called enterland of Adan.

The whole area, which is the southern part of Yemen, produced a very distinguished tradition of maritime trade in the Indian Ocean.

I produced mercantile families that had extended their influence all the way to Indonesia and Malaysia.

And if you look at family names and surnames in Indonesia, Malaysia, amongst even the political ruling class.

You will find a good chunk of Hadrami families.

The Attasis, for example, in Malaysia.

And one of them is a radical scholar, actually, who wrote a fantastic book, The Myth of the Lazy Native.

I I recommend it.

It's a classic from the 1970s.

Really great, wonderful denunciation of the colonial myth of the native being lazy, specifically in Malaysia.

It was written by a member of that family, a lot of us.

These are Hadramis.

Uh, Hadramot also produced an anti-colonial tradition against the British specifically.

It was a troublesome spot for them, even in India, especially in India.

So all the so-called mapila uprisings in India, which are in the southern coast, what the British used to call the Malabar coast.

Those were led by Hadrami, Sayids, Hadrami, heads of Sufi, Tarikas, that mobilized the peasantry, the peasantry used to think of them in India as spiritual leaders, some venerated them even as having healing properties and so on.

And these were very well established in that part of the world and led, again, big rebellions against the British.

So, there's a history.

That is very rich to Yemen, and it's, it's, it's not a self-enclosed place.

It's a place that's always been in touch with the world.

Now we think of it almost always as an isolated zone.

But Yemen is a fascinating.

Incredible country, Daniel.

Another thing to remember.

Some of the, I know you're a big coffee drinker.

Yeah, Yemen, of course, is, along with Ethiopia, is the origin of coffee.

It comes from there.

You know, a lot of the terminology we use.

Why do we speak of arabica beans and why do we speak of mocha?

These are these are Yemeni references.

So, uh, FYI also, the, the, the best skyscapers uh, uh, in the, in the ancient times were in Yemen as well.

For those that are interested, in that, in that side of architecture, just take a look at Sana.

And you'll see the beauty. Of these structures, some of them more than 2000 years old, like, you know, it's an incredible place, and of course, it's being bombed by the United States today.

But today, as back then, you could see the strategic importance.

Because if you have control over that trading route, you could block the Red Sea.

And now we know that the government in Yemen is trying to stand in solidarity with the people of Rezza by disrupting Israeli shipping and the Red Sea, and their response has been to bomb them even more than they used to bomb them before.

I mean, they've really, US imperialism and its allies in the region have really created and manufactured the humanitarian disaster, there are Daniel, that is unbelievable.

But we cannot understand that without understanding actually this background that we're talking about.

Why?

This is Oluthemi O Taiwo, and you're listening to the dig.

You can support the podcast at patreon.com.

The dig is produced in conjunction with Jacobin magazine.

These are tough times for publishing, but Jacobin is sticking at it.

Publishing over 200 original essays every month online and producing the best socialist print magazine in the English language.

Jacobins work is just so vital in creating socialist arguments that can penetrate into the mainstream, and, like Mark says, change, not just interpret the world.

But this work is dependent on your support.

If you're able, please consider going to Jacobinmag.com slash donate and making a tax deductible donation today.

Regular monthly donations help Jacobin plan even better.

That's Jacobinmag.com slash donate.

You'll keep Jacobin going in tough times.

And Jacobin will be there for you for the struggles to come.

I want to talk about the mid-20th century Saudi state, but before we do that, we should talk about how the Saudi state was consolidated in the 1st place, over this, this really long period of time, from the early 18th century. Through the early 20th century, all around a religious movement, founded by Muhammad Ibn Abd al Wahab.

There are, in fact, 3 Saudi states over this period.

Let's start with the 1st Saudi state, and how Wahabism drove its creation from the 18th through the early 19th century.

The 1st was uh, this uh, witnessed this enormous expansion from a small oasis town, the area, to like large swats, the Arabian peninsula, including much of the eastern side of uh, of the, of the peninsula and the western side.

And this is when?

This is starting from 1744, but really extending up to the late 18th century.

Now, in the 19th century, the early 19th century, they take it a step too far by taking the hijaz.

And when they start taking the hijaz. A religious revivalist movement, the Wahabi movement.

They don't call themselves who have you, by the way, but when we use that term, it's in reference to the religious founder Mohammed bin Abdir Wahab.

What they consider themselves to be is monotheists.

So they would hate the term Mohabi, because it's a reference to an individual, and then that suggests that they're following an individual, not God, okay?

And their basic theological position is all these other Muslims have essentially become polytheist animists and are blaspheming against God.

It's a simplification, but yes.

Yeah.

I mean, if you read Mohammed bin Abdul Wahab's main text, which is the book of monotheism, that book, essentially, highlights the virtues of monotheism, the virtues of the oneness of God, but also then it goes into a long list of detailed expositions of different practices that they consider to be polytheist.

So if you go to a grave and pray to the grave, that's policies.

If you have even a big headstone, that's policies.

If you're trying to get a blessing from a tree or from that's policism, if you're sacrificing a lamb to for a purpose other than God or to entity, that's policy.

So, This was essentially, and again, there's a big debate on, to what extent did Muhammad bin Abruha really say that other Muslims are polytheous, and to what extent this was some followers, overextending the ideology or so on.

Um, I actually do believe that he considered them to be polytheist.

Uh, but, but I know there's a body of scholarship, that, that tries to advocate for a more, let's say, moderate understanding of what Muhammad Ahab was trying to do.

But put that on the side.

There's no question that the ideology that it propagated, which is closest to that of uh, the uh, protestant reformation in many ways.

This is why I also encourage people to question this whole Islamism approach when people talk about these things.

I'm like, you know, if you want to call Protestantism, Christianism, then go ahead, you know, because that's essentially what it is.

Saying these people have created Catholicism has created mediating structures between people and God.

It's put in a pope, who's a human being in charge of things.

We should all be able to worship and access the text directly.

We should interpret them literally, um, uh, and we should destroy icons, uh, iconoclastic movement, you know, same thing with the, with the, with the, with the, every movement.

There are many parallels.

And I'm not saying here that it was copying reformation.

But I'm just noting that let's not, uh, pretend that this is some special phenomenon to slap.

And let me be honest with you.

Some of the stuff I see here in the United States, I live in Texas.

There are some Christian cults that are far more hardcore.

Then the followers of Muhammad bin Abdul-ha, when it comes to certain aspects of religious ideology.

Yeah, you're not so far from Waco.

Exactly.

So, when we're looking at that doctor.

Also, some people saw it as a modernizing doctor, because it was about, it has this almost materialism to it.

It's it's a denunciation of the appeal to the supernatural.

And to the mysterious.

So they, they, they, he actually talks a lot about this, Mohammed bin Abdul Ahab.

So, it's austere.

In some ways, it's against the wealthy and the powerful.

I wouldn't call it socialist, by any means, because there is no program for uh, for any, every distribution of income or anything like that.

And there is no, uh, definitely, there's no analysis of uh, ownership of the means of production or or, or taking, take them uh, over.

Uh, but what you have is, um, It's an ideology or religious view that came from a poor region.

Really poor region, that had linkages to richer areas around it in an Ottoman period.

So, you know, he saw the ostentatious sites, uh, um, uh, in the Ottoman capitals, people wearing these flowing robes, and that's why he welled a lot about it.

You know, the, the, the followers in Muhammad Abdurahab.

They like to wear short dish dashes.

They shouldn't touch the ground, because that is arrogance, that is Khayala.

Things like that.

And so, how does this religion move religious movement returning to our previous chronology, go from the 1st Saudi state, the 2nd Saudi state, the 3rd Saudi state, in this context of not only encroaching and then overwhelming European power, but for quite a long time, Ottoman power as well.

Look, they start mobilizing, through essentially, creating a centralized system or centralizing system, that, uh, engaged religious ideology for military mobilization.

So, what would happen usually is you would have different groupings join the movement.

Around Muhammad Binaldu have led by the al Saud.

And then they go and raid the surrounding tribes.

And basically, any tribe, they they raid and attack, they demand that they pay the religious arms.

To the, uh, to the Saudis, uh, uh, which is called the Zeka.

But Zakah here could be seen as almost, you know, its attacks, essentially.

So they effectively created a central taxation system under a different name.

The Zaka is also, uh, in this case, uh, a misnomer for spoilers of war, because they would distribute part of the, the, this, this money to the groups that were fighting with them.

So there was an incentive to join the movement rather than resist it.

And you'd want to join a movement that's telling you, well, you know what?

Your religious practices were no good.

Let me show you the light.

And the truth pathway of God, and you'll make some.

You might make some money on the side too.

In a situation of resource scarcity.

You know, and and then it becomes like a self-propelling situation because the stronger the central ruler becomes the more patronage they can exercise, but also the more fear they could project.

So this becomes forces that belong to the El Saud and the Abdulahab, you know, become widely feared across the Arabian Peninsula.

They're legend, you know, arrives before the arrival of their troops, and that scares people.

And they're really smart because they give you.

An exit.

You can always join them.

You know, so once you join them, things get better for you.

And if you don't join them, things can go really poorly.

Things can go really poorly, but also you have another option.

Pay them.

And you'll be fine.

With that, kind of political military religious structure that's so dynamic and growth oriented, how does this sort of political military religious juggernaut move from the 1st to the 2nd to the 3rd Saudi state?

So, the story is very simple, Daniel.

They take it too far by taking Mecca and Medina and the holy places in the early 19th century, that causes a major disaster for the Ottomans.

The Ottomans derive their prestige as an empire.

Remember, this is the biggest Islamic empire in the world.

Its claim to fame, is that the sultan is the custodian of the 2 holy Harams and the custodian of the 3rd Haram and Jerusalem as well.

So he controlled all the harams of Islam, all the major religious sites, the people.

Do pilgrimage too.

That's a big prestigious thing to have.

And for him to lose the most important center for Islam, of course, with Mecca is a disaster.

And to add insult to injury, with the, with the doctrine that they, that they had, some of the folks around the Southeast State were like, well, you have all these worshipers going to the tomb of the prophet, seeking blessings, and prophet is not God.

You know, remember, Islamic religion, Prophet Muhammad is not God, is not Son of God, is not any, that's why Muslims get so offended when people call them Muhammad.

Because again, Muslims are monotheists.

They don't believe that Muhammad is God.

He is a messenger of God.

And you can just call him Muhammad, by the way.

You know, you would add Salah Allah, he would sell them out of respect and acknowledgment of his status as a messenger, but he is not God.

So, the followers of Muhammad on the have were like, to ensure and make the point.

That is not God.

We're gonna go and play around with the tomb of the prophet, because there's too many people, but doing superstition around it. Trying to appeal for it for magic powers and so on.

That is some seriously risky iconoclasm for most Muslims.

That's the thing.

It's one thing to go, and even do a provocative action like rating, the CI totally cities, which they also did, by the way, and which happened to also be much more ostentatious, you know, the, uh, uh, is, is, there's golden domes and really, really fancy uh, structures there.

Uh, it's one thing to go around denouncing Nazar and Carbella and uh, and uh, and doing raids on Iraq uh, in the, she holy sites.

It's another to even take it to the next level.

And starts playing around with the profit, the tomb of the prophet.

But also, more importantly, it's a big challenge to Ottoman prestige and legitimacy.

So the Ottomans try to mobilize.

Initially, they were really on the defensive.

I mean, the value of Damascus was freaking out, you know, the heavy movement could extend all the way up to Damascus.

They had the whole, anywhere that had open desert expanse, access to it, could be vulnerable to attacks from.

And, and of course, the Ottoman valleys of Basara and Balad were freaking out about them too.

And they didn't know what to do.

They couldn't mobilize enough against them.

They, the one person that could and did was Muhammad Ali in Egypt.

And of course, he had created the world's 4th largest army around that time.

We can talk about him later or maybe will not talk about him because it's its own story and it opens a new door.

And there's an Egyptian, there's an Egyptian super state.

They've colonized Sudan.

Yes, he is behind that.

And again, I, I, I, I do want us to be very cognizant of the fact that these centralizing projects always have some oppressive dimension to them, of the sort that, that you mentioned. Sort that you mentioned is an example.

But what's, what's really important here is to note that, He comes in with this military unit, and essentially carries out the 1st big operation against the Saudi 1st state.

It's the only operation that defeats.

Nothing was stopping them.

It required a massive army, an army of conscripts, essentially, from Egypt to go and fight, and was equipped with modern equipment relative to the region, and it was a big military operation.

So that destroys the Saudi state.

It goes and chases them all the way to the interior nuts.

But he can stay for too long.

You know, Ibrahim Pasha is his son who manages these affairs and his various generals.

They understood that this is rough terrain. Is very expensive.

Their campaign proved to be unpopular outside the hijaz.

You know, everybody in the hijaz were like, okay, few, this is really great.

The Saudis and the followers of Muhammad Abu Dhab are out.

But guess what?

Once you get into Nash, which is where these troops of the Egyptian campaign ended up eventually.

You're competing with local food sources, with the local inhabits over food, over water, you might be treating them badly.

You know, they'll start associating their state under the Saudis with greater freedom. Than being subject to these soldiers that came from far away.

So you had a revival in a 2nd Saudi state emerge after the withdrawal of that campaign.

For internal reasons, and various emergence of different alliances in the region.

It goes on the defensive, and it gets declines again.

And in fact, it ends up producing a state of exile, essentially.

And that's why you find that the current founder of the 3rd state, was dead now, but the founder of the 3rd state, King Abdelaziz, started his political career in exile.

He was exiled in Kuwait.

Kuwait is always minds out of that fact.

And of course, maybe they regret the fact that they gave him exile.

Because he became eventually a headache for them.

Like after he was able to find his ground again.

Yeah, they should have, they may maybe regret not taking advantage of their brief moment of possessing the upper hand.

Right.

Right.

You know, he was a quite an astute and very effective leader in this region, but he also basically depended on managing different imperial powers and imperial conflicts and using them to his advantage.

And this is, uh, and again, this is an interesting situation where somebody who's on the surface sounds like he is propagating a powerful local message of revival rooted in Islam, which is the local religion and so on.

So you'd think it's an anti-colonial damage, but actually it's quite the opposite.

It's all about working with imperialism to achieve the greatest dynastic advantage possible.

This is the methodology essentially.

And initially, he establishes a very good set of relations with the British and uses them very effectively.

They need him for a while because they want to undermine Ottoman allies or the allies of the Ottomans.

So, so, yeah, you have these families that are allied with the Ottoman Empire, these tribal coalitions, that the Ottoman sponsor, including the Al Rashid, or the heads of summer, that's a whole story in its own right.

And, you know, the use of local clans, their connections with different imperial powers.

But the way the British deal with this is they bet on different horses for different races.

And in this race, they bet on the Al Sao.

And they're like, okay, they start supporting him.

And then, they need him to contain the movement that propelled him.

Because, you know, this is, again, this is a religious revivalist movement that's that can have its own internal logic to it, uh, Daniel.

What's interesting about Abdul Aziz is that He wants to rein them in when he needs to.

So the British actually give him modern weaponry, and armored vehicles, to be able to suppress the 1st real big challenge against him that's internal.

He suffers from dissension.

From his own ranks. Who want to continue the religious call and the spread of it.

You have a big clash.

It's called the battle of this villa.

It's basically Abdelaziz cracking down on his own troops, Faisal Dawish, who was like, a major, uh, icon in the hobby, uh, movement, and a real strong man, essentially gets destroyed.

Alongside this is followers, through the use of British weapon.

And then how does that moment of critical British military support for the consolidation of the 3rd Saudi state around the monarchical power of the Saudi royal families, subordinating the Wahabist religious authorities to the crown, how?

Does that then lead to the Saudi shift into?

The American sphere of influence and the centrality of Saudi oil, which is where we get to by the late 40s, early 50s, Saudi Arabia?

Again, let's go back to 1926 and the beginnings of a rift inside the Saudi internal project.

The rift expresses itself and People wanted to expand further.

The British are putting limits.

They're telling Adelazi is, stop, your followers, the Huan, that's what was, they refer them to themselves, from attacking Iraq and Transjordan and these areas that are now under our control.

Uh, we've allowed you to take over a good chunk of the Arabian Peninsula, but there are limits.

Now, it builds up and then we get to this battle, Spilla in 1929.

So by 1929, we have this situation of total uh, uh, victory.

On the part of uh, Abdul Aziz over his internal opponents.

This place of the Dawish, uh, who basically uh, was from a very powerful clan, the Mtair clan, who were long-term allies with the Abdelaziz, uh, and and helped him win his best.

He needs to diversify his relationships, though, because he's worried now that he's overly dependent on the British, and that he'll become just another client.

Treated like the other rulers under the command.

And this is a shrewd character, Abdulaziz.

He looks around at the map and he is like, okay.

There is a better Emerging empire.

That I could strike a deal with.

And you know what?

That empire is also looking around the map, and it needs to develop partnerships.

Around oil.

And it wants a foothold in this part of the world.

So this becomes, in a way, the fanciest marriage of convenience in modern history, potential.

It's, uh, two parties that have very little in in common.

There's been, that had no relationship before, whatsoever, but both establish a very long-standing partnership that will now enter almost, it's centennial very soon.

It's a long-standing alliance.

It's very important for the United States, and it's certainly of great importance for the Saudi State.

Without it, the Saudi state would have been really under the British top.

What sort of Egyptian state took shape over the course of an extremely complex and conflictual 19th century with Muhammad Ali and the Ottomans and then the British colonization of both Egypt and Sudan, which were a united entity at that time because of Egypt's conquest of Sudan.

You know, all of these things are so interconnected, uh, Daniel, you have an Ottoman governor, Muhammad Ali achieving essentially dominance over Egypt in ways that led him to supersede Ottoman authority itself.

He was able in the aftermath of the restoration of Ottoman rule over Egypt.

Of course, the Ottomans lost rule over Egypt for a brief period when Napoleon occupied it, but in 1798, but you had then a restoration of Ottoman power, you had this very ambitious figure taking charge, and I'm not going to go into the details, but essentially, he launches a big military project that has an industrialization dimension to it that's very ambitious.

And then that leads to a multiple set of modernization projects that take place, including in the realms of publishing in the world, realms of education and so on and so forth.

Now, what that results in is also the expansion of discovering beyond the confines of Egypt, you mentioned increasing encroachment upon Sudan, but also expands into Syria and even plans to take over the imperial center itself.

Had it not been for the British, you would have.

It's the European powers that constantly suppress Muhammad Ali, even though he tried very hard.

To appease them.

He's the one, by the way, paves the way for the revival of Christian Zionism.

Interestingly, because Muhammad Ali opens the doors of the Holy Land, uh, all these European consoles and so on.

They allows them to establish presents in Palestine.

It's under him that we get increasing engagements with Europe in that part of the world.

And uh, which produces, by the way, this biblical uh, inspired holy land mania, what scholars refer to as holy land mania in this period. That gets lampooned by people like Mark Twain in his book, Innocence Abroad. Those kind of trends that we have, emerging in this period, start with Muhammad Ali.

Muhammad Ali is forced to retreat out of Greater Syria, is forced to retreat back into Egypt as a result of a joint Anglo Ottoman operation.

The outcome of that is that the English start deindustrializing Egypt, essentially, to indirect means.

They make his project smaller.

They put caps on how many troops he could it could have.

They limit his ability to expand, and through that, they also limit his ability to manufacture.

They impose a free trade agreement.

You know, free trade agreements.

We often think of them during the anti-globalization movement we used to talk of them as a 1990s phenomenon.

And I was very much part of that movement in those days.

And, you know, that's actually where, again, my political consciousness, Daniel.

Same here.

Yeah, so you see, we're both dating ourselves the moment, it's a problem, but yes, I was there in those protests back in the day.

And but you know what?

Like, uh, the same phenomena that existed in the 19th century.

And in fact, it started then, and these British rulers were imposing it all over the world, these colonial authorities.

Including in Egypt and in the Ottoman Empire.

Now, Increasingly, Egypt had to borrow enormous amounts of sums because under the successors of Muhammad Ali, they wanted to keep the kind of modernization project going.

They were doing all these public works, they were doing all these.

And they were getting like, uh, debt.

They were financing it with debt.

But unlike the time when they were operating under their dad, their father used to founder their dynasty, Muhammad Ali, used to have an industrial base and had a different kind of accounting method.

In their case, they were borrowing too much, and they didn't have a mechanism for paying back.

Of course, they had expanded cotton production, and you did have Egypt became a major cotton producer.

It benefited from the decline of American cotton sales as a result of the American Civil War, of course.

But then it goes into a serious economic crisis by the time it hits the 1870s.

Eventually, the economic difficulties that Egypt goes into, uh, leads to problems with creditors, it leads to a military crisis in Egypt where the local herb military uh, tries to save the nation in a way, or save the country, uh, through doing an action that sometimes people see as a nationalist action, others interpret it in a different way, under Orabi, who becomes a nationalist icon for Egyptians.

You know, he's an Egyptian officer who kind of stands up to the European interests in that stage.

The British under the guise of combating him.

And combating and protecting European interests, they go in and occupy Egypt directly.

So in 1880, two, you have like essentially the British occupying Egypt violently to supposedly restore the authority of Muhammad Ali's sons, the Hedewi, the Hedewis, which means the viceroys, and to destroy basically the nationalist uprising that happened against it.

Now, How to read that revolt, uh, uh, Rabi revolt and uh, and and the British reaction to it is a very complicated uh, process.

There is actually a good book on it.

Uh, one call wrote it quite a while back, uh, the 90s, and uh, and I recommend it.

But, um, and we don't have the time to dwell on it too much.

But what we do have time for is to say that since that time onwards.

Egypt was in a situation where it had to grapple with British control.

And all Egyptian, all of Egyptian politics dwelled around this question of what is to be done with the British and what is to be done with the ruling family.

Which the British had, in a way, intervened to protect, but by, uh, entering into the space, they also ensured full domination over that family.

Or a great deal of domination over that family.

And a lot of Egyptian politics was operating in a way that was trying to navigate that terrain between these different power centers.

Some Egyptian nationalists started saying, well, we'll try to promote the royal family as an example, as an example of local independence, and we'll try to coalesce around it because it still has official legitimacy.

So the more power we give it the less power the British have.

Others, you know, were opposed to both the British and the royal family in a way or try to keep a distance from both.

In any case, and you had, of course, a current that was appealing to the Ottoman empire, which was officially the official sovereignty in Egypt, lay with the Ottomans.

So, so you had a whole current that also gravitated towards, towards that.

This was before, of course, more radical movements started becoming really big, you know, and you had you had a genuine Egyptian left that rejected all of these structures later on.

But, um, the complexity of the 19th century, uh, it cannot be fully captured here.

But when I say that by the time we enter into the 20th century, 1st of all, war changes a lot of dynamics too.

Because the British then have to severe the Egyptian Ottoman relationship fully, it's a state of war, so they actually endors a sort of independent Egypt.

Uh, but under their control, of course.

So they severe the Ottoman connection, but they maintain the British control over the state.

And then, they essentially operate through containing the ruling family, preventing it from exercising power, when they find the ruler that's not too close to them or so on, they limit their power, they were playing lots of games.

And you had a very shrewd British figure there that was designing their policy, uh, Cromer.

He was, it was, it was really one of the, one of the, one of the most racist characters you can encounter, really opposed to local education, really look down upon the people, prevented the creation of universities and the development of consciousness.

Very colonial, uh, type and essentially, the British politics in Egypt was about keeping the country down and ensuring the perpetuation of the interests of dominant classes there, including a very large landowning class.

You know, throughout the 19th century, you had a process of concentration of land ownership, uh, and during the British years, uh, you had also a policy of expansion of foreign land ownership in Egypt.

European interests began to really, really control many aspects of the country's wealth and and, it's, it's, uh, it's agricultural base, had large European interests, it's industrial base.

You know, people can have endless debates about whether the percentages and to what extent and whatever.

But at the end of the day, what any anti-colonial movement in the country would see, is that local Egyptians did not have much say over the running of their country or over its resources.

The majority belonged to the peasantry.

And this was one of the most highly exploited peasant populations in the Middle East, if not the world.

The country which used to grow a wide variety of crops was increasingly focused on a single crop, which is cotton.

Of course, there were other crops grown, but you know, cotton production takes over large swats of the countryside.

The farmers are producing it for the benefit of a few wealthy people.

There is an industrial class beginning to emerge, but it's also either foreign or it belongs to a small section of the local population.

The, there is a new working class beginning to emerge, uh, and that's probably the 1st large working class in any part of the Arab world, in different factories.

I mean, Egyptian, I should say, Egyptian history is the 1st in the region that witnesses labor strikes. As early as the Muhammad Ali period because he builds these big factories.

So by the time we get to the 1st World War period and it's aftermath, uh, we have uh, an expanding working class base that is growing.

Now, some historians have also attracted the emergence of radical ideas like anarchism and so on and other socialist and communist varieties, amongst some of the European populations in Egypt.

There was, of course, a Greek population that was very large in places like Alexandria.

There is this transnational Mediterranean diaspora that you find, sometimes Italians, Greeks, bring some radical ideas.

But of course, a lot of left-wing local Egyptian historians also.

I will tell you that these movements sometimes did not, we're colonial in outlook too.

So we have to be careful.

They didn't, you know, just because you are European socialists does not mean that you are not racist.

And even if there was a Greek working class, population doesn't mean that it didn't view the native working class in a different light.

So, so all of these things should be taken into account.

But by the 1920s.

We have a situation where you have uh, definitely a regime that is under foreign control.

But a country that had changed as well.

Because there had been a revolution there.

You know, the end of the, the 1st World War produces an atmosphere where the uh, uh, local nationalist demands for independence intensify.

And they lead to the establishment of a delegation.

That's where the weft party gets its name, a weft, in Arabic, is a delegation, that uh, uh, wants to go and represent the country in the Paris peace negotiations.

And uh, frustration of the efforts of this delegation and the imprisonment uh, of its members and the suppression of its uh, message, uh, in uh, a huge uh, revolution uh, that is uh, that unites.

Many cross-sections of Egyptian society.

And it becomes like an example to other revolutionary movements across the weed for many years to come.

This is where the legend of Saad Zalul gets born, is, of course, seen as a father of modern day, Jushinacism.

It's where also feminist movement often is seen as having been born in that moment, Egyptian women were very active.

In the 1919 revolution, they went and protested and wrote petitions.

And we have some of these, some of these actually, if people want to look at them, they can even Google them, some of them, I know I've been circulating around the internet.

There was a revival in, uh, 1919 documents, uh, in the circulation 1919 documents, uh, uh, around the time of the herb spring, because that was seen as, uh, you know, recapturing some of that spirit, uh, abroad, mass mobilization, people in the street, and there are 1000000s and 1000s and, you know, huge amounts of people, uh, being involved, uh, that enormous energy was felt.

Now, how the British responded to it, give the country some symbolic gestures of independence, but actually keep your control.

That becomes like a constant push and pull between them and the weft, which becomes a representative of that independent strand in a way.

And uh, uh, it becomes like an ongoing drama.

Uh, even though it's a place that has elections under them.

There's a liberal veneer, a facade of liberalism that you see there.

Some space for freedom of press, elections, political parties, and so on.

But there's enormous colonial control at the same time.

And um, the palace is seen as complicit.

And in this colonial control.

As basically the colonial proxy.

Essentially, even though, of course, it's also a party to the games and we should, we know that it had its own projects and maneuvers and so on.

It was a very complex set of political maneuvers going on.

The same is probably true for every client regime, though, in a sense.

Absolutely, absolutely.

And this is why, like, radical historians, we get frustrated.

When some of these, now, like, conservative voices come and use agency arguments around these types of regimes, like, uh, I find it laughable.

I've even critiqued it in an article in the American historical review because look, they come and tell you, oh, well, the local rule is that agency, and we should celebrate their agents.

I like, what are you talking about?

Yes, I mean, everybody has agency, but they're also part of an imperial structure and it's their for domination purposes.

And they're also furthering nascent capitalist interests at the expense of the working classes.

They are also oppressing the peasantry.

They're also suppressing radical movements.

They're also preventing uh, the people from rising up against colonialism.

And nowadays you even have a more ridiculous local trend of historical scholarship. That romanticizes the royalist era in places like Egypt, but also in Iraq, and elsewhere.

And they use arguments like, um, well, you know, the architecture was really nice.

Look at it.

Cairo looked like Paris, sections of major sections of Cairo had these, you know, beautiful 19th century style buildings.

They'll quote cosmopolitanism.

You know, they'll talk about, well, by the time we get to NASA nationalization, which of course we're going to talk about later on, Daniel, but they'll tell you, well, the foreign populations left.

So look at Alexandria.

It used to be a site of Greek poets and Italian writers, and Kavati used to live there and was born, you know, produced his great works there and all of these amazing.

And I'm like, yeah, it's a diverse place with European figures.

Um, but A, let's not forget.

Uh, under Nasir, it's a different set of cosmopolitanism emerges.

You have lots of African figures, but you guys are racist, so you don't care that Kwame and Kuruma, for example, ended up in exile in Cairo, but you like it when Kebafi is in Alexandria.

You know?

So, so, so they, they'll, they'll look down on the new diversity that happened, the openness to the African world, in the Arab world, and and all of these different trends.

The fact that Malcolm X was visiting Cairo for them is less important than some Italian merchant being there owning like big, you know what I mean?

Like there's this whole...

And also, don't don't put all the blame on Arabs for undermining that 1st kind of form of cosmopolitan diversity either.

We know very well, for example, from, as I discussed with Osama Magdisi, the role, the key role played by Zionism, for example, in destroying the world of the Arab Jew, which was a significant part of Kyrine history.

Absolutely.

But, I mean, the other the other bit to note, Daniel, is for them to talk about these things in terms of cosmopolitanism. Requires erasing class analysis, And and requires erasing the whole economic structure from the mindset.

Like, why, why are we forgetting here?

The fact that this is parasitical foreign class that is brought by colonials?

And I'm not criminalizing every Italian or Greek that was in Egypt.

Don't get me wrong, also.

There were many that were, did not necessarily belong to the upper classes, and we're looking for a better life and so on.

But the actual logic of the structure had nothing to do with promoting diversity.

That's not why it existed.

It had to do with promoting colonialism. And economic exploitation.

And it came at the expense of Egyptians.

Now, of course, you did have national schools like Egypt for the Egyptians.

That was even a big, you know, banner of the Orabi movement.

And but that's only natural in a situation like that.

It wasn't about really the important dimension of that was not hatred for foreigners or xenophobia.

The important dimension was a recognition that Egyptians virtually owned nothing in their own country.

Two last things I want to discuss about Egypt.

First, we've talked about the waft party, where, at this point, did the Muslim brotherhood fit into Egyptian politics?

They were founded, I believe, in the 1920s.

Uh, so, uh, this is a, uh, big, big discussion, uh, Daniel, the Muslim brotherhood, a set of dynamics that are particular to, to this, to itself, but also relevant to what we're talking about.

They were witnessing uh, the European encursion.

They were witnessing British colonialism.

The founding character in the Muslim brotherhood is Hassan El Benna, who was active, and who was actually working in the biggest colonial project in Egypt, which is in Ismailia, a city, I was connected to the, uh, uh, Suez Canal, of course, that's why it was established in the 1st place.

Uh, and uh, uh, it's a new city named after Hidewi Ismail, uh, who, who was the, the success, one of his successors to Muhammad Ali.

And that's a place that was where these colonial relations were very evident.

He was somebody who had been traditionally trained.

He had attended uh, uh, Lulum, however, which kind of merged the traditional with the with the with the modern.

It was a structure that was established as part of or by Azharrites or as part of the Azhar, but as the kind of modern division of it, that was teaching modern subjects.

And that becomes a big concern in his life.

How to create a modern Islam, an Islam fit for modern society, but that's still, conserves the core values of that society, and does not adopt the colonial cosmopolitan values, quote unquote.

So he did not want to, you know, emulate these upper classes in Egypt that were trying to look like Europeans, trying to act like Europeans, adopting European ways of languages and ways of speaking and rejecting essentially their Muslim background in many ways as far as he is concerned.

So, there's a big, of course, discussion about certain key moments that have influenced the formation of the brotherhood, there's an important book by Beth Barron, who's directs the center, uh, Middle East studies at Cuney around this.

And, and, you know, she wrote of, she writes of the orphan scandal where there was this, um, there were rumors that essentially missionaries were trying to convert Muslim children to their orphanages, that that they're running, there was fear that there was local infiltration, that was trying to change the character of society.

That colonial.

It's the colonial project was not now only concerned with controlling the economy and the politics.

It was going to change the people themselves.

That's that was a big fear.

The Muslim brother with the hat.

That's why they built a very active social based model of organizing and actives.

You would have the mosque you'd have next to it, the library, they have clubs and associations, you'd have teaching classes.

It offered you opportunities to have an entire world that is imbued with Islamic cultural messaging, but it's using modern tools.

It's using structures that we associate with civil society.

It's a big civil society initiative, actually.

But a conservative one.

And it's essentially politically, even if it's politically extremely consequential, because the Muslim brotherhood at this point in time in history, believes not in direct nationalist political mobilization to confront colonial domination, but instead believes that 1st a virtuous Islamic society must be formed in order for Arabs, Muslims to throw off colonial domination.

Is that right?

Well, I mean, it's right.

And it's not right, it depends on what we consider to be quietism.

It does become quietest later on, definitely.

But, uh, I worry, and this is the difficulty of talking to stories like myself of movements, Daniel.

For us, it depends on the period, really.

I mean, what counts as quiet as at a certain period does not necessarily count as quiet as at another period, but you're right for much of its history.

I would say you are you are correct for much of its history.

Uh, however, can we say that the Muslim brother would never confronted or mobilized strongly against colonism?

I think it did in certain moments.

And there's a reason why its leader gets killed.

And there's a reason why there are moments like 1948 in which it's mobilizing huge amount of volunteers from Egypt, it becomes the major mobilizing force to go and try to protect Palestine, for example, from falling under the control of the Zionist militias.

So, which later become the so-called Israeli defense forces or what we call Israeli colonial forces.

This, this kind of, uh, situation.

You know, does not suggest quietism.

However, they're over, they're, they're very conservative in their, um, In their political calculations.

I can tell you that.

They believe that change comes.

From mass ideological and social mobilization that happens over a long period of time.

The model is really about taking over the grassroots.

It's about changing society.

So you change it through spreading conservative ideology.

And through establishing religious norms there, and that then for them will allow for more effective confrontations. With the structures that they oppose.

Their war is the war of position.

Yes.

I think you've actually described it better than I would.

Absolutely.

Uh, and, and, and I think, you know, this kind of Grampian analysis is very essential here because they're playing actually, in many ways, a Gretchen game, except they're more effective at it than the Italian Communist Party, because they, they, uh, what, what they, what they're doing is, is, is very successful for a long, for, for quite a long time.

They know how to establish deep structures, they know how to win the, the battle over society.

They really do.

The world of physician, they excel at that.

Where does Sudan fit into all of this?

Because Egypt conquers Sudan in 1820, I believe.

And then when the British conquer Egypt, they're also conquering Sudan, and up until Nasser's Revolution, which we'll get to in our next conversation, up until then, the Egyptian monarchy insisted on Egyptian Sudanese Union.

Two things.

Yes, Egypt does conquer Sudan, but I want us to be careful about 2 things.

I do worry about 2 trends and they're both wrong.

One trend that equates the Egypt and Sudan with Britain and Sudan.

There are 2 different things.

To begin with, Egypt and Sudan, is has to do with Muhammad Ali and Sudan, and later on is descendants in Sudan.

So it's about the ruling families, they're not necessarily Egypt and Sudan.

There are, of course, there is a class of Egyptian administrators that accompanies that.

Okay?

And many cases, they're European trained, or they come actually, they're connected to the British colonial power.

So there is this inter marriage between the dominant colonial order and this colony that, that, that nevertheless, is nominally an independent structure and that's controlling another colony.

It's a weird order.

And it's not quite sub-imperialism, which is a term that people used to use.

Of course, for these imperial clients managing, for his on behalf of the Patron Empire.

It's something else.

It's a very strange.

Of course, the British called a condominium, but, you know, but it has, you know, I, I, I, I think we need better terminology here.

You don't want to equate British power with Egyptian power in Sudan.

Because the Egyptians are Muslims, Egyptians speak Arabic.

So do the Sudanese, and there is more in common.

It's not a European power.

However, that does not mean that it's not oppressive.

Non-European powers can be oppressive too.

Okay, and they were in this case.

They can also be a racist.

And they were in this case.

Sudanese are many Sudanese, not all, of course, but many are black Africans.

The majority, even the ones that identify as Arabs and are Arabs.

Because Arabness has nothing to do with race, of course, it's not a racial category.

Nothing.

I mean, all race, all racial. You know what I mean?

Like all races is constructed.

But in the case of Sudan, specifically, um, you know, uh, being Arab or or not has has to do with social categories, it has to do with uh, uh, with linguistic categories and and sometimes religious categories, what comes to the north and south, it's a, it's a, it's a complex discussion.

That's why when people talk of Darfur and they speak of Arab versus Africa, it's a ridiculous discussion, okay?

It has elements of truth in it, but sometimes they do obscure things.

Like what's an Arab tribe, a Bedouin tribe is called an Arab tribe.

Because Arab could mean nomadic in certain settings.

And settled could mean, but you could have somebody who was very, very black.

And in terms of the pigment of their skin.

Being considered to be part of an Arab tribe, and you have these Western scholars calling them Arabs versus Africa.

It's a ridiculous conversation.

It's not a racial conversation in this place.

And all of these groupings are actually quite indigenous to that land.

They've been there for a long time.

Now, of course, there's intermixing that happens, especially between Egypt and Sudan, there's been intermixing for centuries and millennia.

I mean, it's a, it's a very old relationship.

This is the Nile Valley after all.

So you can't just think of it in racial terms.

That's what I'm trying to say.

And of course, uh, uh, you know, thinking of it in racial terms is a very American phenomena.

Nevertheless, you can't cancel out racism from it.

And that's why people who write about this in more nuanced ways, you know, people like Evdrout Powell and others, like, you know, there's there is a literature that actually does try to come for this relationship in a serious way.

It has to be read.

So we cannot go also down some of the claims of the Egyptian, some Egyptian nations, all of them.

They don't acknowledge that there was racism and there was colonial dynamic and and there was even, you know, relationships that depended on enslavement in the time of Muhammad Ali and so on.

There was an enslavement project.

He wanted to create a slave army, Muhammad Ali.

And by the way, interestingly for people don't think about this also, the patterns of domination extended within Egypt itself.

Just because this is a dynasty that ruled the country does not mean that that it dealt with its people gently.

Yeah, that there's some sort of equal democratic citizenship in the metropol or something.

Yeah, which is the myth that sometimes bourgeois nationalism tries to propagate.

They try to erase, uh, the fact that this is very much about class as well.

The Egyptian peasantry was treated like crap.

Really?

They, they, it was, it was a situation that was horrific.

And there was a corvasis, there was forced labor, there was what you could consider here.

I mean, I want to translate it to an American audience, seasonal slavery. Essentially.

For a good chunk of your time, you were just taken and you were told, now you have no control over your time or your labor, whatever, you're going to work for me on whatever project I pick for you.

You're going to build this irrigation project.

You're going to build this road and you're doing, that's what you're doing with your time.

It was a horrific system.

Okay?

And you could be flogged and you could be beaten.

And, you know, and even when you're not working under this corvette or whatever, they were, they were overburding you with taxes and they were taking over the land and they were making you work for them for nothing.

It was a horrific system of control and we, this is not to even mention conscription to the army, which is awful.

And, you know, there is a there is a big literature on this, you know, the realities of conscription.

We can have debates about it, but at some level, that dark dimension has been accounted for in recent scholarship.

So Khalid famine, in particular, zutin on the conscription side of things.

And how horrible it was for the ordinary peasant.

You know?

Sometimes, you know, that goes also too far.

We can't just look at that and erase the other side of the equation of the Egyptian state, which is that centralization also helped get rid of colonials.

So there's there's all of these dimensions that we have to think about and complexities.

This was the third episode of Thawara.

The Diggs new series on 20th Century Arab politics with Abdel Razak Takriti, who teaches history at Rice University.

A scholar of Arab and Palestinian revolutionary movements.

He's the author of Monsoon Revolution, Republicans, Sultans, and Empires in Oman, and the co author of The Palestinian Revolution, Digital Humanities Website, an incredible resource that will be back online soon.

Thank you for listening to The Dig from Jacobin magazine.

As Marks once said, after noting that revolutions are the locomotives of history, while other podcasts similarly interpreted the world in various ways, our point is to change it.

We're posting new episodes every week.

The dig was produced by Alex Lewis.

Our associate producer is Jackson Roach, music by Jeffrey Brodsky.

Our communications coordinator is Sylvia Atwood.

Our senior advisors are Theory of Francos and Ben Maybe.

Check out our vast archives and newsletters at the digradio.com.

Follow us on Twitter and also now Instagram at the Dig Radio.

And please do find us wherever you get podcasts and subscribe to this podcast.

Also.

If you do that, please also rate and review us.

Those reviews help introduce us to new listeners.

But what really does that is you telling people you know to check out this pod.

Please make propaganda for us.

And please do find us at patreon.com slash the dig and make a monthly or annual contribution to keep this operation up and running strong.

Even a few bucks is huge. 