This episode of The Dig is brought to you by our listeners who support us at patreon.com and by Haymarket books, which has loads of great left-wing titles, perfect for dig listeners like you.

One that you might like is abolition, politics, practices, promises, volume one by Angela Y.

Davis.

For over 50 years, Angela Davis has been at the forefront of the fight against state violence and oppression.

This book, the 1st of 2 important new volumes, brings together an essential collection of Davis's essays over the years, showing how our thinking has sharpened and evolved even as she has remained uncompromising in her commitment to collective liberation.

Rich and rewarding, abolition addresses the history of abolitionist practice and thought, the unique contributions of women to abolitionist struggles, and more.

Find abolition at Haymarketbooks.org, where readers in the U.S. And UK receive free shipping on orders over $25 and £20 respectively.

Welcome to The Dig, a podcast from Jacobin magazine.

My name is Daniel Denver, anti-broadcasting from Providence, Rhode Island.

This is the 6th episode of Thawara, the Diggs rolling series on 20th century Arab politics, with historian Abdel Razaktakriti.

Fawara is Arabic for revolution.

It's a word that contains historical multitudes.

Diverse political radicalisms and revolts that have swept across Arab lands over the past century.

This installment is about how in the mid 1950s, the Cold War, a geopolitical conflict born, basically, the same time as the state of Israel, began running very hot in the Middle East.

These introductions are a bit long because, as you know at this point, I'm analyzing complex histories with Abid.

Please treat this introduction as a guide to the discussion ahead.

And as always, you may want to rewind and listen twice.

As the Arab world threw off British and French colonial rule, Western imperialist powers, led by an ascendant United States, attempted to impose new neo-colonial forms of control across the region.

The imposition of this new order was in part motivated by, and in part merely justified in the name of, anti-communism.

It was a hysterical crusade, crafted in substantial part by U.S. Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, who crisscrossed the globe cementing American power.

Secretary of State Dulles' brother, Alan Dulles, headed the CIA.

Overthrowing leaders deemed to be an obstacle to American power in Iran and Guatemala, and as we'll discuss in the next episode, trying to pull off a 2nd U.S. Backed coup in Syria.

In the mid 1950s, the Washington led block sought to bind Arab nations into the Baghdad pact.

A NATO inspired anti-Communist military alliance, led by Turkey and Iraq, also known as the central treaty organization.

The Soviets, of course, resisted the West's attempt to impose an anti-communist neo-colonial order on the region, but to do so effectively.

They had to work in coalition with a wide array of anti-colonial nationalists.

That became possible after Stalin died in 1953, because what died alongside Stalin, was extremely rigid thinking that had from the end of World War 2 into the early 1950s, forced communists across the Arab beast to be hostile to so-called bourgeois nationalists.

The resulting ideological overhaul for Khrushchev's USSR facilitated an urgent foreign policy agenda.

And so throughout the 1950s.

The Soviet led communist bloc deepened its relationship with anti-colonial forces across the world.

Very much including in the Arab Middle East.

It was this Cold War dynamic that presented Egyptian leader Gamal Abdul Nasser, who took power in the 1952 free officers coup, with a challenge, and then also with a historic opportunity.

Initially, Nasser had wanted to achieve independence from the old colonial powers, while maintaining good relations with the West, particularly with the United States.

He negotiated for British troops to withdraw from Suez, which happened in 1954, and he wanted funding for the Aswan High Dam, a massive infrastructure project, and also for the Egyptian military, which faced constant threats from a Western funded, belligerent Israeli military.

The U.S. And Britain refused to fund either the dam or Egypt's military, unless Nasser submitted to a firm Western alliance, an alliance which would include submitting to peace with an Israeli state that had only been founded a few years prior through the Nakba's genocidal destruction of historic Palestine.

To the surprise of 1000000s of onlookers, Nasser refused, and in doing so, he mobilized the Arab world, against the Baghdad Pact and Western imperialism, in spectacular fashion.

This moment of mass polarization, sparked popular movements in the streets across the region.

That importantly included Hashemite Jordan, where mass movements exploded, shaking the government, and forcing them away from the Baghdad pact.

Those movements had substantial Palestinian participation because Jordan then had annexed East Jerusalem and the West Bank.

This was the moment when Nasser, speaking across the region through his voice of Arab's radio service, became a region wide, anti-imperialist, anti-Zionist, and pan Arabist icon.

Cairo became the center of a secular and left nationalist Middle East, increasingly, as Nasser visited Bondong in 1955, Cairo became central to a global 3rd world revolt.

With a left nationalist politics, hegemonic amongst large portions of the Arab world.

The old project of unifying them a Shrek, under a common national banner, was increasingly on the agenda.

In Syria, left forces were ascendant in the wake of Shishakli being forced from power in 1954.

That included bathists, and also communists, the latter buoyed by the increasingly close Soviet ties to Syria and to Egypt.

Meanwhile, Syria and Egypt were also getting closer and closer.

Ultimately, in 1958.

They joined together in one united Arab Republic under Nasser's leadership.

Something we'll get into in the next episode.

This episode on Nasser and his reshuffling of the region's politics, culminates with a discussion of his triumph during the Suez crisis of 1956.

Primarily known in Arab countries as the tripartite aggression, after Nasser nationalized, the Suez Canal, the British, French, and Israelis attacked Egypt.

But the US decided to put Britain in its place, forcing them to back off.

Although Nassar doesn't win militarily.

He's nevertheless victorious politically.

He successfully defends nationalization, and also sets off another round of widespread protests across the Arab world.

Particularly in those corners of the Arab world under some form of British domination.

In Iraq, that moment helped pave the way to the 1958 July revolution against the Hashemite monarchy, a really important event that brought the Iraqi Communist Party to the pinnacle of political power.

A period we'll discuss soon in a forthcoming episode.

I do hope you're finding this series useful.

Thawara is the most ambitious project we've ever taken on at the dig, and we're doing it because we think it's essential political education for this moment of renewed 3rd worldist internationalism that's emerged in response to the genocide in Gaza.

We can only put the digout every week, thanks to listeners like you supporting the dig. At patreon.com slash the dig.

We do not pay well anything because the dig is a not-for-profit operation dedicated to political education.

We want everyone to listen regardless of your ability to pay.

But that means that if you can afford to pay and you do want to support the dig, then we really need you to contribute.

There's a link in the show notes.

Click it now.

We also, depending on where you live and how much you donate, have a book or books to send you, or a tote bag, or a coffee mug.

All contributors.

Get our excellent newsletter written by Ben maybe, delivered to your email inbox.

Contribute now, support the dig, support Thawora.

That's P-A-T-R-E-O-N.com slash the dig.

Okay, here's Abdel Razaktakriti, who teaches history at Rice University.

A scholar of Arab and Palestinian revolutionary movements.

He's the author of Monsoon Revolution, Republicans, Sultans, and Empires in Oman, and the co-author of The Palestinian Revolution, Digital Humanities website, an incredible resource that will be back online soon.

In the 1950s, the Cold War intensified, and the Western camp put increasing pressure on Arab countries to align with them and against the USSR.

By the mid 1950s, the specific project on the table was a U.S. Aligned, well, Western aligned military alliance rooted in Iraq and Turkey called the Baghdad pact, but already in the early 1950s before the Baghdad pact had taken shape.

The question of Cold War alignment had already become really central. In the region.

To start out this discussion, lay that out.

How, how did the Cold War in the late 40s and then through the early 50s?

How did it 1st start to make its way to Arab countries?

And what, and what are in these earlier years before the Baghdad Pact is officially on the table?

What are the early Cold War stirrings of the form of Arab non-alignment that would come to be known as neutralism?

You, I think, in a conversation we were having offline, you told me that neutralism really began to take shape in Syria, in 1950, 1951, well before Nasser went to Bandung, or bought weapons from communist Czechoslovakia, really, even before Nasser and other officers launched the free officers coup.

So Daniel, let's take a step back and take a look at the world after the 2nd World War.

You have 2 blocks developing as is well known, a communist block, and the Western block, as a result of the victory of these forces in the 2nd World War, they're trying to vie for control over the world.

And, of course, this has ideological dimensions.

It was essentially a struggle between communism and capitalism as it was presented globally.

Now, on the Western front, which was always a dominant one.

And we should remember that, because it was the, the, the block that had controlled, the vast amount of countries in this world, through colonization.

It had all the British colonies and the French colonies.

It had all the American spheres of influence.

They were, uh, seeking to create new neo colonial dynamics in the way, in a way that allowed them to reshape the world.

They did a variety of military alliances in order to further these dynamics.

So they created NATO, which included a lot of the essentially European powers.

They did the Balkans alliance, which included Turkey and Greece.

Of course, Yugoslavia joined it for its own reasons to contain Stalin.

And the US did an agreement with the defense agreement with Spain to give depth to NATO.

And there was also a Turkish set of agreements in the Middle East.

So the Turkish centered agreements had to do with the area that was to the southern part of the Soviet, to the south of the Soviet Union.

These are the so-called northern tier countries, Turkey, Iran and Pakistan, is that right?

That is correct.

So the northern tier is the terminology, the imperialist terminology around this.

They called it the northern interior countries.

And the essential idea there was to create some form of anti-Communist buffer zone slash an area in which the Western cap could operate freely for the purposes of putting pressure also on the Soviet Union.

And that means having bases, it means having military installations, it means having spying centers, ballistic missiles, all sorts of uses to having defense arrangements with these countries in the context of the Cold War.

You know, you also had a Pacific, they mentioned to this.

We're not going to get into it, you know, you had the Manila Treaty.

It's a global project.

And that's really why it's important to not think of this just in Middle Eastern terms.

This is a global project.

Now, when it came to its Middle Eastern angle, there were some particularities.

The most important being that, in a weird way, the U.S. Could not actually be an official signatory to the treaty that they envisioned there, and that had to do, at least according to John Foster Dolls, one of the key figures in formulating U.S. Policy in this period, had to do with Israel lobby voices in Congress.

So, those pro Israeli forces in Congress, did not want to have a situation where you had a defense treaty to which the United States would be a party that involved the Arab countries next to it, because then that creates problems for the Israeli states, state.

So, the US had to be out.

But it had Britain, and it could offer all sorts of support behind the scenes.

So officially, the main Western power that was coordinating this effort was Britain.

In reality, of course, the US was the real sponsor of this project.

And what about what about that early development of Arab neutralism that you were telling me about, the sort of anti-neo-colonial politics that you say emerged in Syria in the very early 50s, well before the explosion of this mass Nazarist moment later in the decade?

So already after the end of the 2nd World War, there was a raging discussion.

Across the region, including in Syria, about the question of alignment.

And it became clear that there was going to be a competition between the 2 major powers that were victorious in the war, the Soviet Union and the United States.

And that discussion was played out locally in different countries.

Now, in Syria, it took a particular form because there was so much concern with preserving the independence that had been gained following the war, and ensuring that the country will progress on a pathway that does not allow it to fall under foreign rule ever again.

So the question of national sovereignty became very important.

And different parties and political movements emphasized that.

They were seeking to avoid falling into the trap of American and Western alignment.

But also, some of these movements were opposed to alignment to the Soviet Union, because they saw that as being a form of, and another form of foreign control.

They did, of course, they thought of American and Western intervention as a far more serious threat.

There were also anti-Communist forces that did not want alignment with the Soviet Union, but that had a nationalist agenda, or were committed to independence and did not want to alignment with the United States.

Interestingly, the position of the Syrian Communist Party was very critical towards these forces throughout the late 40s and early 50s.

Khalid Bektash, uh, was the secretary general of the party, denounced this concept, saying that you have to choose between either camp, the camp of justice being the camp of the Soviet Union, or the camp of oppression, uh, which is that of the United States and the West.

So I continued to be as policy and the policy of the party until the death of Stalin.

And following the death of Stalin, we see a shift.

You've been talking about the British and the Americans.

But what about the French?

Uh, power that had been so critical to the Arab Mashrek for so much of this prior history that we've been discussing throughout the series.

Do they have a say over the Baghdad pact or has their power faded so much at this point that the French really just don't matter so much anymore?

So, with regards to the French, Daniel, they did not have a zone of influence in the areas that were targeted by the Baldad pact.

They did not have control over Turkey.

They did not have control over Iraq.

Of course, that was a British former colony.

They did not have control over Iran or Pakistan.

These were all primarily either former British colonies or former British zones of influence.

And in the case of Turkey, of course, it's a direct relationship with the United States that facilitates for its position in this equation.

So, the only place that the French had previously enjoyed considerable influence was Lebanon and Syria, and Syria, obviously, was the main one of the main targets for expansion of the of the Bangdad pact.

But the French, by this period, no longer exerted control over Syria.

So, really, we're finding that the pact is targeting countries in which the West either has current control, had current control, or where it had had recent influence and was seeking to reassert that influence.

What is Hashimite Iraq's role here in the projection of British and later, more U.S. Imperial power across the region?

Is it fair to describe Nuri al Said's Iraq as merely a British client state or is Iraq actively pursuing its own regional order and its own perceived interests through this allegiance to imperialist powers?

There's elements of both.

I don't think they're mutually contradictory.

Iraq, under, under Notice Said, who was really the strong man of Iraq in this period, was completely aligned to Britain.

Nouri was Britain's man in the region.

He did not believe in separating from the West.

He, uh, uh, like others of his uh, sword in the Arab right.

And I've articulated their ideology in previous episodes of the day.

They felt that in this world.

The world was a very dangerous place for them, and they felt that Western alignment was the best place in that setup.

And the West was the dominant power.

There's no point in angering the masters.

So that was their outlook.

Now, could they benefit regionally through this Western alignment?

For sure.

I mean, Nori was very happy to have a situation in which the entire northern tier would be connected to Baghdad.

You know, you, this is why you have, uh, of course, uh, the, the initial treaty is is one between uh, Turkey and Pakistan in February uh, 54.

But then the most consequential treaty and and for the Berdad pact, and that's why the pact is named after it, is a February 24, 1955 treaty between Turkey and Iraq.

And of course, the pact headquarters then is hosted in Iraq, there's a lot of prestige for that.

It gives a sense of Iraq being an effective regional player.

At Nur Said, uh, had at this stage, Daniel learned from the lessons of the failed Portsmouth Treaty.

He had long been attempting to get to force through an imperialist arrangement for Iraq, and we'll be able to talk about Portsmouth Treaty later on.

There's no need to go through it now.

But the point is, it was one of those imperialist entanglements that the Iraqi social movements that defeated.

And the Iraqi anti-colonial movements are defeated.

This time, when it came to the Valdet Pact, he had learned from that from those previous defeats, and he was ready to basically ensure that all the forces opposing the pact. Would be neutralized locally in Iraq, including the radical forces.

And at the same time, that would have signified for him, the objective, one of the main objectives of the pack, pact, which is to prevent the communist spread in the region.

Yeah, because in so many ways, it's really impossible to disentangle the domestic from geopolitical interests that play Iraq's interest in opposing the Soviets abroad is fundamentally tied up with their interest in repressing the very powerful Iraqi Communist Party.

And absolutely.

And let's not forget the class interests behind this and the position of these people.

Why would a privileged colonial figure like Nori Said, who's benefiting from Iraq's new entry into the world market, through the mass export of oil in the stage, and who's benefiting from Iraq's growing stature in the region?

And who's personally benefiting from what's going on internally in Iraq in this period.

Why would he and members of his class, not oppose the communist threat as far as they're concerned.

It is a threat for them domestically.

They don't want to see communism emerging in error, but also they're firmly.

Tied to the West.

So, they do a strong crackdown on the Communist Party, and they've been engaging in that for several years, uh, Daniel.

The attacks on the Communist Party were very severe, and they created a situation where the communists had lost a lot of, a lot of their weight and strength.

You know, by the time we get to the Berdad pact signing.

Part of the reason why that succeeds is that there had been a very strong, and quite cruel, anti-Communist war waged by the Iraqi state for several years before.

So they were able to weaken the communists, but also weaken other political parties in this period.

So this is one of the main factors. That was underlying what was going on.

Turkey plays such a critical role in this larger geopolitical situation.

What was Turkey's trajectory from before their World War one defeat, from being the seat of Ottoman power over the Arab Mestrik, through pursuing a genocidal nation building project, to ultimately becoming this cornerstone of imperialist and anti-communist power in the Middle East by the 1950s?

Turkey learned from the lessons of World War I. They were like, we were, we were, we were, we're not gonna be aligned in World War II.

So that was something that was important to note.

However, once World War II had concluded.

Turkey's government made a choice that contrasted severely with that of the anti-colonial governments in the Arab region.

They made a choice of going of aligning with the West.

This had many different factors to it.

Some of them have to do with Turkish strategic location.

You just have to remember that in terms of great strategy.

Turkey's historic threat was always the Russian empire, and later on, of course, the Soviet Union inherits it.

So even you just have to look at the map.

That's the main, that's the main threat for it in some ways.

Of course, things change after the Soviet Union because there's no clear plan to expand into Turkey.

However, the entirety of the Turkish elite had been socialized to think of the former Russian imperial lands in those terms.

And there were good reasons to believe that, uh, you know, had the Soviet Union had the opportunity, uh, to, we asserve control over Turkey, it would have.

Now, of course, you had social movements in Turkey that wanted being aligned with the Soviet Unions.

There is a communist movement in Turkey.

Uh, one of the world's greatest uh, communist poets.

You know, Nazim Heckman comes from Turkey and he's, you know, we're not going to go into this tradition now.

There is a strong working class struggle in Turkey.

And that leads eventually all of those clashes between these progressive movements and Turkish government lead to different coups and different crises in the history of Turkey.

However, when it came to the government itself.

The government was anti-Communists.

Ataturk did not believe, obviously, in communism.

We believed in Turkish nationalism.

Its successors had similar positions.

But it's interesting.

The question of why did not did they not pursue a policy of non-alignment.

I mean, we'd understand why they wouldn't align with the Soviet Union.

Why would they ally with the United States against the Soviet Union, but the real question is why didn't they pursue non-alignment?

And here, that's a subject that has been addressed in the literature in comparative terms, actually, there's a very strong study on this by Rima Bul Fader.

She compared Egypt to Turkey in this period specifically, and tied this to both ideological, as well as geo strategic factors.

But essentially, she was looking at these trajectories as having to do also with anticolonial traditions, or like the raw in the case of the Turkish elite here.

That Egypt, the government there, as was the case in the rest of the Arab region, had an unresolved sovereignty question, they had been actually colonized and had to engage in a long term independence struggle.

In the case of Egypt, that was going on from 1882.

So, their opposition to Western control is quite understandable.

At the same time, the insistence of local collaborationist forces, like Norris Said's government, their insistence on Western alignment was also understandable, given the same background of the history of colonization in the region.

Another key imperialist allied nation here is Iran, but that had not been the case a few years before, because, of course, in 1953, the U.S. And British, they orchestrated the overthrow of the Iranian Prime Minister Mohammed Mosadek after Iran moved to nationalize its oil.

How did this imperialist coup reverberate across the region?

And what in particular did it mean for Iran under the shah to become such an important pillar of western power specifically that was being projected across the Arab Mishrik?

I mean, Iran has enormous geopolitical importance, as you know, Daniel, and I was actually glad that you previously had hosted one of the most distinguished scholars of Iran, Skander Sadige Borjardi, who was a dear friend, and I'm sure he could answer your question here much better.

But, um, It's very clear to any observer, including a non-specialist on Iran, like myself, that it's held a very special position in this region.

It's very important for the Middle East.

It's very important for Central Asia.

It's very important for a range of Soviet territories in this period.

It's essential for the security of the Gulf as well as the, uh, even the Indian Ocean.

So, there's all sorts of implications for the control over Iran.

It's also a major oil exporter, and in this new era, of course, the last thing you want to have is oil exporters, nationalizing oil.

And we know very well from both the Iranian experience at the time, but also experiences in different parts of the world, including Venezuela and elsewhere.

The politics of oil play the big role in determining how the US was going to deal with a particular country that had that resource.

In the case of Iran, it would have set a very dangerous precedence.

Had uh, Musadak succeeded in uh, nationalizing this key resource uh, and had they succeeded in setting a precedent for doing so in this region.

Uh, because that would send a signal to other countries that had, uh, either just began exporting or we're beginning to explore oil that such a policy was possible.

Of course, the Western interests at the time was to create the situation where they can get the maximum profit possible from the extraction of this resource.

So it was very important that you had a Masadak Masadak's policy or reverse.

It was also very important that you have a citadel. Of American imperialism established in Iran.

You needed a place for which you could spy on the Soviet Union, a place where Soviet control would not extend.

And again, here we're dealing with a country that had a very strong and powerful communist tradition.

It had a very large Communist Party, the 2 Day Party.

It had even the communist, uh, supported, uh, experiment, including the the Kurdish experiment in Iran, uh, during uh, the republic of Mahabad and other uh, experiments, uh, that uh, had some uh, support.

From Soviet forces, all of this meant that Iran needed to be kept outside the Soviet sphere of influence.

Before we get to Nasser rallying opposition to the Baghdad pact.

There's one more key imperialist aligned force that we need to talk about.

And that, and that's Israel, the Zionist entity violently formed by settler colonialists in 1948.

What's the role of Israel in this moment's larger imperialist and anti-imperialist emerging Cold War geopolitics because the West was heavily funding Israel.

And then, in 1955, Israel launched a major attack on Egypt administered, Egyptian administered Gaza. 10 months later, a major Israeli attack on Syria.

What's Israel's role in this emerging neo-colonial, imperialist order.

And, and how, how can the West at this point possibly pretend to be a friend of any Arab nation, including a nation like, like Hashemite Iraq, while backing such a brazenly belligerent Israel in the way that they are?

Well, that was a problem that was confronting the West.

A lot of people, again, do not do not account enough for the fact that Israel really harmed Western plans in the region at this stage.

I mean, I alluded a little bit to this when I said even the United States could not even sign its own sponsored project in this region.

Partly, uh, at least by by one influential interpretation as a result of uh, Israeli pressure.

But additionally, the main, the key element that made the U.S. Position difficult in this region as a result of Israeli, um, of its Israeli entanglement, uh, was in relation to Egypt.

Egypt is the key player at this moment, outside of Turkey and outside of Iran.

The biggest country in the Middle East is Egypt.

These are the 3 big countries in terms of populations, and in terms of regional stature at this stage.

Iraq, of course, was a competitor, but a smaller competitor to Egypt at this moment, despite commanding greater oil resources.

So, Egypt has the greatest deal of regional weight.

And Nasser was trying to arrive at a respectable formula with the West at this stage.

It was, it was trying to uh, finance the high dam with with the West.

He was trying to find ways to rebuild the Egyptian military with Western weapons.

And he was keen on establishing healthy relationships with Western states as far as he saw them, you know, by his definition.

Even as he's trying to get the British out of Suez, which they occupied until a 1954 treaty, but even then he's trying to do so in a, in a fashion that does not occasion a rupture with Western power.

Yeah, so his main his main challenge was he made a distinction between the old colonial powers of Britain and France and the United States.

His hope was that he could arrive at a formula, where the British leave, he establishes a good relationship with the United States on the developmental and military front, without, uh, suffering from neo colonials.

He had some parameters to this relationship.

And that's why he was staunchly opposed to initiatives like the Bardat packed, because he saw them as basically threatening, um, colonialism and new colonialism under a different name.

Uh, so uh, and he said this regularly in speeches.

He communicated this openly.

He said, we didn't fight against the old colonialism so that we could replace it with a new one.

We don't want to be part of treaties.

And remember, Britain had actually shekeled Egypt with a series of treaties.

So there was a treaty phobia on the part of Egyptian uh, independence figures like uh, Nasir, where it was so treaties as a way to control their countries rather than liberate them or defend them.

Syria, at the same time, is adopting a similar approach to Nasser, because there's a political order there that's taking shape after Shashakli is overthrown in 1954.

And it's far more anti-imperialist, far more left-leaning by later in 1955.

It's a government that's led by the relatively conservative president Shukri Alkawatuli, but nonetheless, there are left forces like the Bath and the communists that are growing their power, and the government is turning towards neutralism and toward increasing ties to the Soviet Union.

Yeah, absolutely.

The Syrians are facing a similar situation to the Egyptian independence leaders on this.

They have a similar estimation of the problems confronting them.

And of course, luckily for Syria, on the Eve of the Berdad pact, you had the overthrow of the Shishakli government.

And uh, you had uh, a fairly uh, flourishing democratic period in in that country prevailing in that country.

So you had a strong parliamentary life during which you had communist representation in the government, Khalid Baghdash, when the seat in parliament, is there.

You have different political parties, represented in the government, and Sukril Kawatli, although an old traditional leader, decides that he is going to take stands more closely aligned with Nazir's Egypt around these questions.

So he keeps these people keep Syria out of any form of entanglement in such effects.

But when it came to the U.S. And Egypt, and to go back to that point, Daniel.

The US eventually messes the relationship with Egypt, partly because of their Israeli stats.

So they want Egypt to absorb Palestinian refugees and resettle them.

And this is very important for the situation of Resza today because that's when the 1st iterations. Of the Sinai project. Appear.

And that's when also you have the big demonstrations that happen in Gaza itself. Against the idea of repatriation or removal to Sinai.

So there were all these projects that the Americans were proposing, of like, let's expand, uh, some of the areas around the Gaza Strip.

Let's put some refugees there, you know, in Sinai.

Let's not talk about refugee return in the state of Israel.

Let's not talk about a situation, like a piece, a treaty that would allow for a just resolution to the refugee question and all the other questions relating to the Nakba.

So, the Abden Nasser actually refuses to engage with them on this.

And in during this period, he suffers 2 blows from the Western camp.

Uh, in part as a result of his, um, uh, of his of his stance in relation to the Israelic question.

They, uh, do not give him the financing for his main developmental project, which was the S1 hideout.

And this is the British and the Americans that ultimately pull out of funding the stamp.

Yeah, and the Americans were really supposed to be the main donors behind this vision, and they give all sorts of indications that they were going to back.

And then you have, also, their refusal to provide them with the necessary armaments for the Egyptian army.

And again, this was something that he needs to find a solution for, because in the world that we're describing, you, the only options for armaments were either Western or Soviet.

Israel is already attacking, Egyptian administered, Gaza, armed by the West, just 7 years after violently dispossessing Palestinians in 78% of historic Palestine and the Nakpa.

Yeah, and another is getting pressure from Wazza.

I mean, there's all these demonstrations that erupt and the rest of the strip that are organized by actually a very strange union between the communist and the Muslim brotherhood.

It's actually through the teachers union, that this is organized.

And people like Moin Ceso was a very prominent communist poet.

He and one of the leading communists of Reza.

He actually plays a key role in leading those demonstrations.

And the slogans they're raising is no resettlement, no housing, or you agents of the Americans.

So they were accusing not sort of being an agent of the Americans at this stage initially.

Now that has to find solutions.

Nasser has to find solutions.

Now, a swan high dam, uh, eventually, uh, the only solution that he finds is the USSR.

And initially, Americans thought that, you know, Nasser is, uh, is bluffing them when he said, I'll turn to the Soviets.

But you know what?

He was willing to make that move.

That was a huge move.

In this context.

You know, going to the Soviets for High Dem funding was a huge move.

The other thing that he does, and they're really twin moves, because you couldn't have done one without the other, is he does, before that even earlier, an arms deal with Czechoslovakia.

And that happens on 27th of September, 1955.

So around the same time, when you have the Baghdad packed arrangements going on.

So how did Nasser articulating this anti-colonial vision?

How does he rally the Arab world against the Baghdad packed and what, and what are the consequences of Nassar's attack on the pact being so effective and him making these attacks in the way that he did attacking, attacking the pact and also attacking Iraq and Turkey as being essentially imperialist and Zionist proxies?

What was the impact of this incredible polarization over the Baghdad pact?

Its impact on Egyptian domestic politics, on Syrian domestic politics, on politics, and geopolitics, all across the region.

Let's let's think about what Nasser needed to do at this stage.

First, he needed to try to exert pressure within Iraq, to prevent the pack from being signed.

And um, really, the Baghdad packed wars, let's call them that, or the struggle over the Baghdad pact.

Uh, is uh, the 1st big episode in which Nasser uh, makes his presence on the Arab scene on the pan Arab scene really felt.

People did not know what to think of Nasser before that.

They had conflicting feelings.

Uh, especially in places like Syria, Iraq, and Jordan, and Palestine, in the, in the Arab mashrech.

You know, there was a suspicion of anybody that came to power through coups.

Because the, the, the 1st school was Hustin Zaimku. Was sketchy.

It was seen as an American move.

And a lot of people thought that this might be the same.

And even if it wasn't an American mood, the fact that it's a group of army officers, and, you know, as was the case in Syria, it created instability.

It created a situation where Huntes were interfering in government.

It was not seen as a good thing by progressive forces.

And Nasser is, like does immediately outlaw all political parties.

Uh, not immediately, but gradually, very soon after, you know, uh, it cracks down on on political parties.

So, you know, he has his reasons.

We can go into them later on.

Actually, he presents them in terms of alignment.

They're related to the story we're trying to tell.

But, um, uh, but essentially, what he does, as he comes in and establishes a radio station, uh, and in 1953, the Egyptian intelligence.

Come in and put a blueprint for a radio station that was gonna have enormous influence in the history of this region.

Because it provided Nasser for a direct tool to communicate with the broader Arab masses.

And he chooses a title.

Uh, that is captivating at the stage for uh, these are messes.

He calls it Saotel Arab, the voice of the Arabs.

And he picks like really talented people, who, uh, had a way of inspiring the general mass feeling in the region, especially the anti-colonial one.

So, he picks Ahmed Said as the key, Ahmed Said, emerges as the key kind of inspirational figure, radio figure, at this stage.

And, uh, the, uh, Saultelara focuses on anti-colonial themes.

It starts talking about Arab struggles, about the need to expel the British.

It's covering different forms of Arab clashes with colonial forces across the region.

And it's transmitting Nazarest emancipatory messages from the shekels of colonialism.

That resource becomes very important during the battle that pact, the battle over the Berdad pact, because through this tool, you have the spread of a strong messaging system against this pact.

And Nasser is confident, Muhammad Hassan and Haeckel actually was commenting around this time, that the strongest revolutionary force in the modern world is a transistor radio.

I know this is difficult for us to talk about now because who listens to transistor radio anymore.

I don't think many, many people don't know what transistor radio is, but I bet you do, Daniel.

Definitely.

So, and in a region like the Arab region where it's a very large zone with many different countries and different aspects to it, extending from the Atlantic to the Gulf.

If you have a station that comes in with this message that's anti-colonial, from the most important Arab capital, from Cairo, from the largest Arab country, Egypt, in terms of population, and with the most vibrant and established political tradition at this stage, that gives you enormous power.

And there are things that help with this, because Egypt also has cultural capital at this stage.

All the great singers come from Egypt.

All the great performers, all the great films.

Egypt is, this is the golden age of Cairo.

This is when Uncle Thum was singing on the radio waves, of the Egyptian radio waves.

And the whole of the Arab world would stop to listen to her.

And that's a phenomenon that is developing around the stage.

You have the whole of the Arab world would pause to listen to Nassir's speeches through this radio station.

And he's a very gifted author by the way.

So, and he's picking on themes that reach the people and have echoes with him.

Now, when it comes to the Baradat Pact, Egyptian radio is playing a big role.

Saotal Arab is playing a big role and talking about the problems with this.

Pact.

But also local parties in the region agree with that.

So you had, in a way, immobilizational force, locally, that had existed independently of Nazir, and it existed before, that was united in opposing, uh, the Berdad Pact.

All the neutralists in the Arab world were opposed to about that pact.

Well, the Communist Parties in the Arab world were posted about that pact, clearly.

Well, the bath is emerging nationalist formations that later coalesced into the movement of Arab nationalists, or became a movement of what was called the movement of Arab nationalists.

That was also a block that was opposed.

So you had all these forces that had no interest whatsoever in supporting this pack, even some liberal parties that had an anti-colonial angle to them, and some figures from the liberal age in Iraq opposed about that pact.

So, The only problem is that in Iraq, Notice Said outplayed all of these forces.

He was able to get it through.

So the struggle then became over Jordan.

Because as I mentioned, Syria already had a good setup that was that could prevent the spread of the pack to it in the initial year of 1955.

But Jordan was the weak link.

Jordan had a Hashmite monarchy that was pro-British.

It was tied to Britain already with the treaty.

It had a British, British officer running its army, the infamous or famous glob passer.

He was a figure that had commanded the Arab legion, but like for years, uh, and um, He played a disproportionately, uh, big role in Jordanian political life.

He was still in control.

So it was only natural that Jordan would join this pact.

And the main forces that were behind it were pressuring Jordan.

So, so, you know, they sent Jalal Bayar, the Turkish president at the time.

He went on the 4th of November, 1955, to Jordan.

His visit became a major, major catalyst for contestation and for demonstrations against the pact.

And there were so many demonstrations that you had the resignation of multiple governments in that year in Jordan.

Prime Minister Saider Mufti initially resigned in the 14th of December '55.

Then you have like a weird situation in Jordan where you have a one week government.

A government that lasted literally one week under Hazal, Majali.

You know, it was a point on the 14th of December, it had to resign on the 21st of December.

Again, that government initially was appointed to enforce about that pact.

But the demonstration did not stop, because the Communist Party had mobilized so well.

The Bath Party mobilized so well.

They also, you had a very strong nationalist block under Suleiman ability, another patriotic figures, that had mobilized very strongly against the Baghdad pack.

So you had this situation, where mass demonstrations were going on, especially in Amman, in Jerusalem, in Nabolis.

Remember, the West Bank, Palestinian West Bank was now under Judean control.

So these were considered to be Jordanian cities at the state.

Jerusalem, Naples, everywhere.

And in Jerusalem, actually, the 1st, or the most prominent martyr of the Jordanian student movement, a, and women's movement, Raja Abu, Abu, Amship.

She actually gets martyred during at taking down the Turkish flag, from Turkish consulate in Jerusalem, in Sheikh Zarah.

Sorry, not Razabo, I'm sure.

No, Raza, Raza, Ahmashi, becomes an icon of the Jordanian student movement.

I should note here on a tangent.

She's symbolizing a very new trend, which is the strong feminist involvement now and this emerging feminist trend that is allowed for young women like her to be leading demonstrations.

She led this demonstration against the Turkish consulate.

Many people, by the way, get this incident wrong.

They say it tap into the British consulate.

Some people say it happened in the American, but actually it was the Turkish.

So, but you know, it symbolizes uh, this this new uh, vigor that was happening.

These movements were invigorated by the rise of their student rebellion across the region, essentially.

The students played a key role in opposing the Berdad Pact.

And Jordan, essentially ends up becoming the graveyard of the pact in some ways.

Yes, the pact continues, but it was unable to expand beyond Iraq.

The only Arab country that joins it with Iraq.

You have another Jordanian government yet resigns after these big demonstrations that we talked about, Brahim Hashim resigns, then, eventually, Samir Refai, who is not known to be a progressive figure in Jordanian governments.

He's a prime minister that is known to be very oppressive, quite right wing.

But on the 8th of January, he's installed in government, and the king entrusts him with forming a government.

It comes in, tries to crack down, but finds, again, that the demonstrations have continued.

So we have this remarkable situation where for multiple weeks, more than 8 weeks, you have endless demonstrations in this place.

Actually longer than that, Daniel.

And mass protests, mass rallies, mass meetings, despite repression, all these leaderships are going underground, people are getting imprisoned.

Big prisons are getting established.

There were, there were, it's a made affair, I was preparing for 1000s of people to be in prison.

But they fail.

The popular pressure leads to Baghdad, the Baghdad Pact, falling in Jordan, And that's considered to be a big victory for both the Jordanian national movement, but also for Nazirism and Nazi.

Yeah, and here you have this dynamic area of the, this kind of highly centralized leadership in this figurehead, embodied it, articulated by Nasser, and then also connected, but a different thing, this mass politics, of new ideological parties, mass politics, that's happening in the streets, and it's all converging and exploding in opposition to the Baghdad pact.

Totally.

Totally.

You're so right on this, Daniel.

And I'm telling you, it's one of those inspirational, you know, when you're a historian, often you're reading through, like, really depressing stories with defeats, especially if you're a progressive historian, you want, you want the, you want the progressive forces to win, you know?

But they often don't.

And then you're like, this is one of those great stories where the people win and and it makes you really happy to write about it.

Even though you know that there's other things that happen later on that that, uh, reverse results, but, but it was, it was definitely a very important moment, very important victory for Jordan and for the region at the time.

And of course, for Palestine, which Jordan and Palestine were together at this stage.

So, it's an incredible achievement.

Uh, it means uh, then that the Americans have to think of new ways for controlling these countries.

And they do.

They come up with new ways.

In 1955, Nasser attended the famous Asian African Conference in Bandong, Indonesia, and it's important to emphasize here that Egypt, even as Nasser is becoming this, this Arab nationalist icon.

Unparalleled Arab nationalist icon, that Egypt and Nasser looked, looked not just east to the Mashrik, but also west to the Maghreb, and south to Africa, and really looked all over the emerging 3rd world.

Generally speaking, where does this Arab moment fit within this larger 3rd world revolt sweeping the globe?

And then, and then more particularly, where does Arab neutralism fit into a larger emerging, non-aligned movement, where countries like India and Yukoslavia are also playing major roles?

I mean, let me let me start by saying something.

Ben Dung, there's been a lot of mixup around it in recent years.

Because of course, it's such an important moment, Daniel, but in the run-up to it, it was not clear to everybody that was involved, uh, how it will play out and and what will be the main achievements discussed in it.

Or achievements arrived in.

So, we're having this kind of iconoclastic moment in scholarship around it.

I completely reject it.

I do not accept the statements made by people.

Some scholars, including Robert Vitalis, others are saying rubbishing these leaders of Vendung are saying that there's not like, that they had no idea about what they're doing.

They're especially focusing on Nasser saying that he had no clue.

Uh, I think it's, it's, it's not fair, and actually, uh, what we need to look at is we need to separate the mythology around Bandung, but also, uh, from, from the fact that there was actually a very consistent and clear idea in the minds of people like Nazir on what they wanted to achieve in the world that they were trying to, to, to create or recreate.

At this stage, when Nasser was going to Bendu.

It's 1955.

The majority of African continent has still not gained its independence.

The vast majority.

The vast majority.

Uh, there are multiple Arab states that have not gained their independence.

So, uh, you have uh, Algeria still under uh, uh, control.

You have uh, uh, uh, a situation uh, where uh, the, the Maghrib is barely coming out of French control, the, the Morocco or Tunisia.

You have a situation.

And of course, Nazer plays a role in both cases, you know, in the in the liberation of both countries.

You know, during his period, he enhances something that existed in Egypt at the time in Cairo, which is the Bureau of the Arab Maghrib, and supports it hugely.

And that hosts all these great liberation figures from Tunisia from Algeria, from Morocco, and supports their struggles in a substantial way.

And of course, he backs Muhammad al Chamez, the Moroccan monarch when he gets exiled by the French, in something that I would describe as a colonial coup, or that eventually fails.

So, He has deep entanglements.

He wants a colonialist out.

From these regions.

He wants the colonialist out from the Arabian peninsula.

They were still in control over the entirety of the Gulf Coast.

States.

And uh, they, he wants him out of Yemen.

And we're gonna talk about all of these struggles.

Later on, we're able to have a whole episode dedicated to that.

But at this stage, it's very important to just look at the map and see the daunting tasks, uh, that are confronting him.

Now, some there's a big debate.

Some people in the literature suggest that that's just for opportunistic reasons.

Uh, he wanted Egyptian dominance in the region.

That's also the story that the Arab Wright talks about.

They've always had this line around Nazis.

They say that it was just about achieving Egyptian dominance, and somehow they, by seeking support from the West, were protecting the independence of their countries.

This is the irony and this kind of line.

Of course, Nasser had an idea for enhancing Egypt's position in the region.

There's no doubt about it.

He was an Egyptian patriot.

But also, he was somebody that thought in grand strategic ways.

He read a lot of grand strategy.

We spoke about it before.

When you follow his speeches, including on the question of the bad pact.

It's quite astonishing.

He lays out the full map.

He talks about everything that's going on and provides a geostrategic regional interpretation that is situated in a global context.

So he asks questions.

He's like, okay, let's say we join a pact like this.

Does that mean that the Arab countries would then have to be involved in a world war in case the Western camp decides to clash with the Soviet Union?

Will they be, what are the nuclear implications of that?

What are the other implications of that?

Uh, you know, uh, these are issues that that, that we don't talk about enough, we don't think about.

There were big implications for joining, for being aligned at this stage.

And at a time when there's such an arms race.

When these countries, where essentially developing weapons of mass destruction of a kind that had never been witnessed before.

And of course, the Americans started that trend, but then the Soviets caught with it and everybody knew that the world was going to be a very different place under this formula.

So, Nasser has a clear set of objectives.

He wants independence.

He wants a world in which smaller states, like Egypt.

And like virtually all the states emerging out of colonialism, would play a role, would be able to preserve their sovereignty, would be able to control their natural resources. And would aid their fellow sister, uh, African and Asian nations, in gaining their independence.

This is why he opens the door in Cairo, the doors of different training camps in Cairo for liberation movements.

This is why he supports them.

So he's so national interest as being intertwined.

With a broader, regional, anti-colonial interests, and that's under the banner of Pan Arabism.

And uh, uh, also an international anti-colonial interest uh, under the banner of Afro Asian uh, solidarity.

So Egypt is being centered, and this is something it describes in his book, The Philosophy of the Revolution.

And Egypt is at the heart of 3 different circles.

There is an Arab one, an Islamic one and an African one.

And it was going to contribute effectively to all of these different circles.

And where, more specifically, does this idea, this concept of Arab neutralism fit into this related but broader idea of non-alignment?

So it fits directly because um, let's start with actually the debates are on neutralism.

Because initially, you know, the whole conversation really starts in 47 in earnest.

Because you have, at the time, the Soviet line, was that you can't be neutral.

Stalin had announced an anti-bourgeois policy.

And all these communist parties in the air world, we're pursuing the anti-bourgeois.

They were saying that, bourgeois bourgeois leaderships, in the colonized world, have to be denounced, confronted directly.

And also, they need to actually be forced out of the Western camp and into the Eastern camp.

Which is a problem for communist parties on the ground, because they're taking orders from Moscow, unfortunately, as we've discussed extensively in past episodes, and it's forcing these local communist parties to essentially denounce the substantial portions of their country's national liberation movements that are led by what Stalin would call bourgeois nationalists.

Correct.

It means that you can't form a United front with key independence figures, with movements where you might have some common ideas about anti-colonialism, you know, and common projects on social reform with.

So it's a problem.

You're absolutely right, Daniel.

But when Stalin dies, uh, you know, uh, there's, uh, that, that, that problem ends.

You have you have actually then a new policy coming in in the region.

And Khalid Bagdas, they figured we talked about earlier, is the 1st to pick up on that.

Initially, he had many speeches between 47 and 53 denouncing the bourgeois leaderships, saying that denouncing neutralism.

He was saying, you cannot be neutral.

You either have the camp of peace and justice and development or the camp of imperialism and its agents.

So now, you know, it moderates its stone after the death of Stalin.

And that helps him actually, uh, you know, in the, in the, uh, both in the confronting the CCA government and later on in, uh, in the electoral campaign that gets him elected after its, uh, its fall.

So, in many ways, the, the, this, this, this becomes the golden age of the Syrian Communist Party.

You know, the mid 50s is great for them.

They're, they're establishing their power, they're growing.

And here, that leads to a serious problem for the Coetli government, because you have a situation where there are figures in the Coetli government, that, 1st of all, are deemed to be too close to the communists. Especially in the army, with the appointment of the misery, to the army leadership.

Uh, the Americans decide that that this is too, too pro-communist, as far as they're concerned.

They also start, like, spreading all these rumors about Syria falling to the communist hands.

They're freaking out about the fact that it was no longer imprisoning communists on a big scale, that under the new era, you had an actual democratic situation where communists were able to function.

John Foster Dulles is constantly hyperventilating.

Oh, he was freaking out.

And, you know, these people, Daniel, they're obsessed.

Remember, they're obsessed with communism.

Both inside the U.S. And outside of it.

They, they think the whole world, uh, is, is gonna be taken over.

It's the red scare is enormous, but also, uh, it was used for imperialist purposes.

It was not just, you know, genuine feeling that everything is going communist only.

They feared that.

But also they, they, it was a useful way, saying that a country was going to fall to communism, allowed you to try to take control over it as well.

So, you know, and we'll talk about this later.

There's this Syrian crisis that emerges out of that.

But to take things back to get Ben doing.

Mandung, we're seeing here, now they're going there.

He's pushing an agenda, uh, that other uh, leaders at the time found agreeable.

In many parts.

You know, the ideas of national liberation and commitment to the liberation of different people, the ideas of alignment gained traction, you know, at this stage.

The Chinese play a big role in facilitating this and their so and lie.

Of course, Indonesians play a big role.

Nehru actually takes a very strange line in Bandung, and his relationship with Nasser initially was tense, but eventually they find the functioning, you know, a way to make it to make it functional.

But in any case, what we end up with there is some clashes, though.

And one of the big clashes is surprise, surprise, a question of Palestine.

What's going to be done with Palestine.

And here, of course, Nasser and other Arab delegates play big role.

And trying to impose that on the agenda.

And to ensure that it gets adopted by the countries.

There are people that are trying to avoid it.

Some figures are worried about the West getting upset if there's too much focus on Palestine.

Sounds familiar.

Absolutely.

Absolutely.

So, you know, you have all sorts of machinations to keep it outside the discussion, but they fail because NASA is there.

Other Arab delegates are there.

They push it through.

Interestingly, by the way, Bendung is also attended by the future founder of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Ahmed de Sukeri.

But, um, the Bandung period is very important because after Nasser comes back from Bendung.

Uh, that uh, emphasizes, again, the, the, the themes uh, that he was trying to address when he was opposing, uh, the Baghdad pact.

It re-emphasizes this notion that there is no need to be aligned in that way to east or west.

That there is a way forward.

There is a better way to achieve what they called peace and international cooperation, and they really meant peace and international cooperation in a genuine way, not in that kind of Western language around us.

You know, and they they managed to also keep a united front despite the fact that some of the countries attending, we're actually kind of aligned.

Like, we should remember here, that this did not start as an unalignment conference.

Started as a conference that included the independent nations of Asia and Africa.

But, um, eventually it becomes associated with, with, uh, with non-alignment.

How amidst this intensifying set of regional conflicts over the Baghdad pact.

These regional conflicts with major global Cold War implications, and amid Egypt becoming really a leader of this larger decolonizing 3rd world, how amid all that does Nasser move to nationalize the Suez Canal in 1956.

He had negotiated the withdrawal of British troops from the canal in 1954, but the canal's imperial ownership had remained a huge piece of unfinished decolonization business and and its nationalization then took a major colonial asset out of French and British hands.

We have to understand that Egypt's stature has grown substantially at this stage from both, opposition to the by that pact.

And then its ability to participate in Ben Dung, in a leading way and to articulate a vision of non-alignment there.

While at the same time, being able to secure an alternative source.

For funding its big developmental projects, and its rearmament in a manner that allows it to exit from the Western orbit or the orbit of Western dictats and control.

Now, Egypt was still confronting another major and daunting task.

Which is to get the British control over the Suez Canal over.

They they went through a long series of negotiations with the British to try to get them out of the canal through peaceful means.

Uh, they managed to get British withdrawal, partly, partly through a Fida EN campaign.

So like a, a gorilla, uh, word for type of campaign against, uh, British installations there.

However, there was still British ownership and control over the canal in that way, that economics sense.

And here, NASA was influenced by what Mossadak actually did in 53.

He had studied it closely.

He thought, you know what?

That was the correct thing to do.

The main natural resource of Iran was the oil.

So that tried to do the right thing.

And of course, agents of uh, imperialism launched the coup against him, but um, in Egypt, that's not going to be the case as far as he's concerned.

The, the front, the internal front was unified as far as he is concerned.

Partly because we had cracked down on different movements.

You see, uh, in his worldview, the independence struggle was far more important. Than party diversity.

And he thought that the old liberal parties are too close to the West, and would be used as tools of the West in case he were to carry out these kind of independence battles, including something like the nationalization of Suez, which, of course, it wasn't initially, you know, it's not like he thought of it from the minute he took control of Egypt, but such projects were on his mind.

And he thought that on the other hand, it'd have the communists would drag them drag them into alignment with the Soviets.

So, his solution for non-alignment was forget about the parties.

That creates, of course, a lot of bitterness against them, including in the left, within the left.

But there was also support.

For the moves that he undertook uh, after he had suppressed uh, party life and carried out initiatives like the nationalization. Of this West Canal.

So, uh, in his worldview, he was in a position to nationalize, it was a bold move, but it was also a dangerous move, because Britain was not yet, you know, over.

It had not yet lost its control over the world.

It was still a big imperial power, Daniel.

And Naomi Klein, and you're listening to the dig, my go to podcast. For the most thoughtful in-depth conversation on the left.

It's an incredible place to be exposed to new ideas and new writing.

And if you can, please become a sustaining supporter at Patreon.

If you're listening to this episode, you've likely already listened to many, many hours of Thawara.

This is without a doubt the dig's most ambitious project ever.

And if it's not already clear, we're launching this supremely detailed inquiry into Arab radicalism, in the making of the modern Mashrik, because it forms the historical backdrop to the unfolding genocide in Gaza, in the struggle for Palestinian liberation, that is remaking politics the world over.

We're seeing a new internationalist phase of left politics, intensify in North America, and elsewhere, and we want to improve our collective historical literacy about Arab political history, a history that is fundamentally about resistance to Western imperialism.

The events described in this series, not only inform the political and social train, that today's struggle for Palestine must contend with, but also provide lessons and insights for those of us organizing today.

So, please, spread the word about thawara, by word of mouth and on social media.

We think it has a large audience that we haven't reached yet, help us find them.

This episode of the dig is brought to you by our listeners who support us at patreon.com and by Haymarket books, which has loads of great left-wing titles, perfect for dig listeners like you.

One that you might like is, what was neoliberalism?

Studies in the most recent phase of capitalism?

1973 2008 by Neil Davidson.

While it is widely agreed that neoliberalism arose in the wake of the global economic crisis of the 1970s, there remains much debate about how to understand its significance and even how to define it.

In this important posthumous publication, the late Marxist scholar, Neil Davidson, brings his considerable intellectual breath and characteristic generosity to bear on this critical question, paying particular attention to the social dimensions of neoliberalism.

Find what was neoliberalism at haymarketbooks.org, where readers in the US and UK receive free shipping on orders over $25 and £20 respectively.

What happens after Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal in 1956 is that there's this tripartite, British, French, and Israeli attack on Egypt.

And unsurprisingly, this has absolutely massive implications all across the region and the globe.

It's what becomes known as the Suez crisis or the tripartite aggression.

And we'll get into all those reverberations soon.

But first, how did these 3 imperialist parties hatch their conspiracy against Egypt?

How did they plot this aggression?

The background story to this is something called the protocol of Sevres, which took place in France.

Uh, David Bengorian was an architect of this.

He had arranged for a meeting with his French counterparts in Sevres, and he went with Shimon Perez, and Moshe Dayan, to meet with their French figures, their French counterparts, and and they cooked as well as their British counterparts under Selwyn Lloyd, who was the British foreign secretary at the time.

So you had, uh, these figures, the French foreign secretary, PNO, uh, Selwyn Lloyd, and and, uh, the Prime Minister, David Bengorian, uh, agreeing that, uh, they will uh, carry out a 7 point agreement that uh, uh, presented uh, a plan to attack Egypt.

Uh, and a plan uh, to give a pretext.

Uh, for uh, the uh, the attack.

So it was, there was going to be a two-step process.

And there was gonna be a cover story. To it.

So, the plan was, you would have, you'll have a situation where the Israelis attack, and they would, of course, need to then invade Reza.

And then from there, you know, they continue onwards.

And essentially, the uh, they reach the, the, the, the, they will reach the canal zone according with this.

And then the British and the French governments will make appeals.

To both parties to uh, to stop the war.

Okay?

So for the Egyptian government, they were going to ask it to halt all acts of war, and to, uh, and I'm quoting here directly from the treaty of, of protocol of Sev, uh, they were going to ask it to withdraw all its troops 10 miles from this canal.

And then they were going to ask it to accept temporary occupation of key positions on the canal by Anglo-French forces, to guarantee freedom of passage through the canal by vessels of all nations until a final settlement.

End of quote.

Now to the Israeli government, they were going to ask for, quote, halt all acts of war, and then withdraw all troops 10 miles to the east of Canal.

Then, if the Egyptian government fails to agree with this with the conditions, uh, that they imposed, then Anglo French forces would intervene, and they would launch military operations.

And the Israeli government will go and occupy the western shores of the Gulf of Akaba and so on and so forth.

Now, the, uh, there's important clauses there that the British insert, they have big back and forth with the Israelis.

They worried that Israelis will go and try to do a land grab in Jordan, which is very important for Britain at the time, and it's tied with Britain with the defense treaty.

So, uh, so they don't they don't want the Israelis to attack Jordan.

So the British had these clauses to had a clause, they specifically protected Jordan.

However, that clause also ended up saying that if Jordan were to attack Israel in this context, then the British would not come to its say.

So, essentially, the British kept Jordan out of this of this battle as they went and carried out to attack on Egypt.

And as the Israelis carried on their attack.

Cried the outdoor attack.

Incidentally, by the way, Israelis commit many massacres in Gaza, including a very famous massacre in Yunis and elsewhere.

They, they, they had a very, and that, that becomes the resistance against the Israeli occupation was, it becomes very important for subsequent, uh, the subsequent course for Palaceum politics.

We'll talk about that later.

Just as an important aside, given how horrific these massacres objectively are and how they're subjectively perceived at the time, the fact that the genocide taking place today is just on another order of magnitude and scale that would have been hard for these people with all of the horrors that they were seeing to imagine.

Absolutely I mean, it's uh, it's absolutely gut wrenching.

What's going on now.

Daniel is unprecedented in its skill.

Absolutely.

It seems like one of these historic moments that is very much overdetermined.

What role did the nationalization of the canal play and prompting the attack?

What role was played by broader issues related but not reducible to the nationalization, like Nasser's mobilization of Pan-Arab nationalism, against British power, all over the region, and Israel's alarm about that as well, and Israel's more particular desire to crush Palestinian militancy emerging from Egypt administered Gaza, and also French anger over Egypt's support for Algerian revolutionaries.

There are just so many factors to consider.

How does this tripartite aggression in 1956 over Suez come about?

Well, I mean, the French thought that Nasser was a huge nuisance.

He had already supported the liberation struggle in Algeria in very meaningful way.

Remember, uh, Daniel, the Algerian revolution had been raging for 2 years by the time this happened.

So we have a very vigorous challenge to France in a part of the Arab world that is considered to be French, which is Algeria.

It had officially counted it as French.

So, um, And now there was supporting liberation movement in Algeria, in a big way, not in a small way.

People now sometimes forget that.

But he played an important role.

This meant that when it came to the French, they were keying on undermining him.

Yeah, they had reasons to do so.

With the Israelis, we know what their reasons are.

It's like all settler colonial states.

They're they're troublesome in their neighborhoods.

South Africa was big trouble for all the states surrounding.

Namibia, Angola, Mozambique.

Absolutely.

Central colonial states love to cause trouble.

Because they are, they are surrounded and and they, they see themselves and rightly so, as being surrounded by hostile neighborhood.

Nobody likes central colonial states.

But also they're motivated.

By expansionist logics.

If they don't expand, they feel that they will retreat.

Look at the history of the country we're both sitting in right now.

Absolutely, 100%.

And unfortunately, Daniel, this country is the dream of all said Luconial states.

And here, of course, I'm very keen to emphasize that there are indigenous futures in this country.

And there is an active liberation struggle going on here that we all must support.

So we should not forget that and imagine that the settler colonist project is one in its totality.

However, as far as settler colonial projects go, the genocide that was committed here was on a scale that is unimaginable, and its results were so horrific that it led to the demographic overwhelming, to the indigenous population, and I know you've been talking about this on the dig for many years, and you've hosted many great voices around this.

So they dream of achieving that.

The problem they run into in places like Palestine and South Africa.

Uh, is that demographically, uh, they're surrounded by a neighborhood that is difficult for them to overwhelm.

Uh, they, they, they don't have the numbers to completely overtake these, these, uh, zones.

Now the Israeli state, this solution is to try to push as many people out, and by doing so, of course, is pushing them to the surrounding area.

And then it has to clash with the surrounding area.

So, you know, it demands that the surrounding area accept these refugees and seize and not do any hostilities with it, and sign peace treaties with it, and become essentially states that are under its thumb.

Yeah, that's the only condition that it will accept.

What happens next is kind of remarkable.

Egypt is defeated militarily in the Suez crisis, but nonetheless emerges victorious in so many ways achieving a massive political victory.

How does that happen?

And specifically, why does the US, the rising US imperial power?

Why does it so decisively push back against the tripartite invasion of its allies, Britain, France, and Israel?

So, At this stage, Britain's move is seen as ill considered by the Americans.

They're angry.

The fact that they were not, they were not consulted.

This was done in secret.

Britain thought it was living in a different era, that it was still this big empire that doesn't need to consult, that it could undertake an independent policy in this, in this world.

And the US needed to send this signal of, look, you may have been the Great British Empire before the Second World War.

Now, You're gonna come back to the new imperial fold.

You're we're going to have to teach you a lesson.

Okay, if you think that you can do anything in this world without us, then you're wrong, and you're wrong for many reasons.

Starting with money.

Financially, Britain would go bankrupt without US support.

Militarily it would be destroyed.

Britain cannot match the capacities of the Soviet Union, the entirety of the defense of Europe, has to depend on US power.

Britain cannot carry out the defense of Europe against the Soviet Union alone.

So, for it to adjust to this junior partner role, was, uh, that was a gradual process, but Suez uh, was part of the process.

It was a key moment in that process.

The 2nd issue, uh, here, uh, Daniel has to do with the fact that there's too much at stake here.

What if the Soviets decide to intervene in a decisive way?

Uh, I mean, the threat of nuclear war. Is huge at this at this stage.

And at the time, it's not like we think today, oh, everybody was just bluffing and If the Soviets suggest that they could go into nuclear war, who knows?

Maybe they would have.

Now we know that they were more careful, but as events were unfolding.

Uh, these kind of situations uh were dangerous.

The Americans thought that uh, they could do without, uh, uh, all of this.

Furthermore, they were worried that this actually undermines everything they've been trying to build.

They wanted to present the West as, you know, supportive positive force in the 3rd world, in the newly, you know, uh, independent countries, uh, so as to prevent uh, further alignment with the Soviet Union.

But if you come in and and and use brute force and occupation, and uh, engage in such games, and they clearly were games.

I mean, the protocol of is a joke, Daniel.

Like they think that they can trick the whole world into thinking, oh, our Israel is attacking and we're just like trying to prevent the little boys from fighting.

So we come in and and we just attack Egypt and take them out of the, you know, out of the equation.

It's a really thin, a really thin.

Thin pretext, and it's attacking a sovereign country, and even if they're claiming that it's related to Egypt breaking the Treaty of 54, uh, with this nationalization.

You know, they were claiming all sorts of, you know, they were making all sorts of legal arguments.

But that was too risky for the Americans.

It wasn't good for their, for their, for their plans for the international order.

So they sent their signal and they were like, no, this is not gonna work.

And that was a message to the French as well, by the way.

And to the Israelis.

The Israelis is not so much because Israelis, you know, they were not the big losers out of this equation.

If anything, the withdrawal of the troops meant that Sinai was effectively the militarized at this stage.

And the straits of Tehran were open to their navigation, whichever way they wanted.

And that Egyptian sovereignty was reduced in the border areas that belonged to Egypt, in line with Israeli wishes.

And that becomes the big problem, uh, that eventually leads to uh, the 67 war, because not, not certain, actually asks in 67 for the removal of the peace keeping troops that had been put in that area and that it prevented, that it undermined uh, Egyptian sovereignty in those areas.

So by restricting, basically, Egypt's control over its own territory there.

Given these outcomes, how is it that Nasser emerges so victorious that it really brings his stature within the Arab world to, which is already grown considerably in the regional mobilizations against the Baghdad Pact, brings his stature and prestige to just another level entirely.

Well, think of it this way.

He manages to nationalize the canal.

And it gets away with it.

You know, that that in of itself is one of the greatest achievements in the history of anti-colonialism, period.

When you think about it.

And it's this sharp contrast to Mosadec just a few years prior.

Absolutely, but Suez Canal is even bigger in some ways than it runs oil, not because it runs oil is less of an important resource.

But because of the geopolitics around it.

I mean, we're talking here about the main passageway connecting the Mediterranean to the Red Sea, to the to the Indian Ocean.

It's a shortcut between Europe and Asia.

And for the empire to lose, that would have been huge. On so many levels.

It's humiliating.

You know, you could get away with them.

It's not good for them financially, of course, to lose Iranian oil.

It was bad for prestige.

Anyways, they're both bad.

I mean for them.

I mean, let's not go down that road.

We're making these comparisons, but the West Canal was a huge deal.

You know, symbolically for the for the British Empire is very important.

So they certainly lost a lot of prestige with that.

But also for Egypt, it was important because they were able to win a sovereignty battle through uh, standing their lines through refusing to uh, back off and through also playing a smart regional game.

I mean, when we're talking about the Americans.

The Americans are also observing what's happening in the region.

You have the British colonies effectively, which were the protected states in the Gulf.

These areas are seeing mobilizations that you cannot imagine.

Daniel, the biggest mobilizations of their history happen in 56.

You have oil worker strikes.

You have attacks on British bases. Including by some ruling family members.

I mean, it's fascinating.

The current sheikh of Sharza.

He writes in his memoirs about how he participated in an attack on an RAF base.

Royal Air Force Base at the time.

This was a cross-class kind of alliance that developed around this.

Everybody was listening to Sotel Arab voice of the Arabs.

Nasser understood that you could gain influence over the empire, by mobilizing the people.

So, you have huge demonstrations in Jordan.

And the British honestly lose their position in Jordan out of this.

It becomes like impossible to sustain their old arrangement there.

The nationalization, uh, of the uh, of the Jordanian army. Becomes a big theme.

They what they call the Arabization of the army.

This happens in a context where you have a situation where countries like Jordan.

I've come out of the Baghdad packed battle and come out of the the herbization of the army battle in Jordan. Led to the frustration of British aims in that country.

But also, uh, meant that, uh, uh, during this time, uh, uh, the Jordanian uh, national movement was ascendant, to the extent that when the tripartite aggression took place, they were unable to uh, to keep Jordan in line.

Jordan becomes very rebellious.

Uh, during this period.

The Baghdad pact was, of course, intended to strengthen the region's imperialist aligned, imperialist aligned monarchies and strengthen their ties with the Western imperialist powers, but, but instead, what it did is that it gave Nasser and other radicals an opening to paint those monarchies as imperialist client states.

And so, and so Nasser, as we've been discussing, played the Suez crisis very much to his advantage. And sparked this mass popular action across the region, which made things really uncomfortable for the Hashemite monarchies in particular.

How did the Suez Crisis play out in Iraq and perhaps most intensely in Jordan?

Yeah, so, uh, in Iraq, you had a very difficult problem because, of course, Iraq was already a member of the Berdad Pact.

It was actually at the heart of the Berdad Pact, as the name of the Pact suggests.

And it was seen as very much a country within the British camp that was officially tied to Britain, with a military defense agreement.

How can a country like that?

With strong popular movements remain in the British orbit while Britain was attacking the largest and most significant Arab country.

And that contradiction. That was there between the popular feeling on the street, and the position of the government, was a cause of discontent for the next couple of years in the history of the country.

You cannot isolate.

The events that took place in the Iraqi Revolution of 1958 from this background story, from the accumulation of grievances, including the grievances that took place during the so-called Suez crisis or the what we call in Arabic, the tripartite aggression against Egypt.

So, Iraq had its own dynamics and perhaps we can talk about them in greater detail when we speak about the revolution that took place in Iraq a couple of years later.

But in the case of Jordan.

Jordan was already undergoing a set of serious changes.

By the time Suez had erupted, and by the time the tripartite aggression took place.

Already, it had erobized the army, which was a big popular demand.

And just to clarify, the Jordanian Arab legion was literally led by a British guy until like 56.

Yes, it was led by one of the most famous British figures in the history of the Middle East, John Bagot Glob, was otherwise known as Glob Pasha, or as he was known popularly in the Jordanian Army, Abornik.

Now, Glob Pasha was a fascinating character.

He actually ended up quite liking the Arab world while, of course, representing a British imperial interest in it.

It was one of those contradictory figures.

His son, Ferris glob, incidentally. Became quite radical, and was engaged in all sorts of solidarity movements with revolutionary groups in the region before dying, I believe, in a tragic car accident.

But, um, essentially, you had British control over the army, through glob Pasha, and uh, a range of senior British officers under him.

So that was a cause of discontent in Jordan for many, many years.

How can a country claim to be truly independent when its own army is controlled by a foreign general.

The general, belonging to the old imperial power that had controlled it.

Uh, so you had, you know, the fall of Gladpass, the fall of this, uh, British control over the army, took place in the context of the mobilizations against the bus that pact.

These mobilizations in 1955 created a serious political crisis.

We talked about it already.

And that meant that you had a popular sentiment and a popular mobilization and a huge situation that created a crisis for the king.

He felt that it was no longer sustainable to keep the army under British control.

Now, uh, some of the biographers of the king and and, you know, uh, in his own uh, self-projection, uh, suggests that uh, he also felt a wave of nationalism at this stage uh, and that he uh, did not want the British to continue to rule.

I'm not so sure about that, maybe, but, you know, he definitely went against advice of his more conservative pro-British forces in his government at the time, including his mother, Queensland, sort of who was, by the way, a very important figure in the history of Jordan under British rule.

Sometimes you forget, Daniel, that women play big roles, including on the conservative side, and they get erased from the story, but it's important to remember that Zen is sort of was a very consequential figure.

He went against her with when he took out the British control over the army.

He also went against senior ranking right wing figures, uh, like Samira Defi and others.

But in many ways, it was a very smart move on his part.

Because what allowed this conservative regime to persist for so long, uh, is that uh, he was able uh, to read this the street correctly, uh, and to see that uh, he could not keep on opposing the popular will when it came to a matter like this.

We will talk a lot more about the Arabian Peninsula in future episodes, but we should just briefly outline that over this decade, Saudi Arabia, which is a really consequential, powerful force in the region, is sort of swinging from being surprisingly Nasser aligned to more Nasser opposed as the Cold War divides intensify.

Yeah, and Saudi Arabia has its own dynamic in the 1950s.

I mean, 1st of all, it should be clear that its grounding in the American camp was always very strong.

The Saudis had joined the American camp, uh, was the 1st country to join the American camp in the region.

It did so through essentially giving the main oil concessions to the US companies, and which of course is a big story in the history of US diplomacy because the fact that they were able to strike this deal and to establish the Arab American oil company, Ramco.

You know, it was an incredible feat at a time when the British had a stronghold over the Middle East.

So the Americans were able to gain grounding in the richest oil fields through this agreement.

And they established a very strong relationship with the Saudist state.

They had a role in every aspect of Saudi political and economic life at this stage.

Nevertheless, Saudi Arabia had its own regional interests, and it needed to deal with its main opponents.

Which were competitors on the conservative side.

Mainly Hajamite, Iraq.

You needed the counterbalancing force to that.

So Egyptian Saudi relations could be explained partly.

In that light, but partly because at the early stage of the 1950s, there was no clear contradiction with Abd Nazer.

He was not yet advocating a regional revolution against conservative monarchies.

And as we'll discuss in future episodes, There were really Nacarite royals in Saudi Arabia as well who were substantially, who were significantly powerful.

Yeah, you had the free prince's movement, and they had their own outlooks on this.

Of course, you also had figures, like Prince Faisal, who later becomes King Faisal, who was always suspicious of the Naser, and of Egypt's rule.

He wanted Saudi dominance in the region, and he had his own visions, for what should happen in terms of Saudi relationship with Egypt.

And of course, he, he, he clashes with Abdul Nasser, but that's, that's a later story.

At this stage, the shift in Egypt's regional role furnishes the ground for that future Egyptian Saudi contradiction.

As Egypt begins to gain increasing regional prominence.

Daniel, it also begins to radicalize its policy more.

So, uh, really, uh, the 1st test of Egypt's leadership was the clash over the Bardat pact.

They passed that test with flying colors.

They were able to essentially through hard work in places like Jordan. Were able to prevent the expansion of the pact.

And of course, as we know, in Syria, there were internal dynamics to Syria that enabled the Syrian political parties to prevent that pact from being joined by Syria anyways.

However, the Egyptian role there was also important.

Because you had the development now of an increasing reprochement between Egypt and Syria, in the context of opposing these external pacts.

Yeah, I want to talk about these 2 key relationships that both go to another really serious level during this period.

First, that relationship between Syria and Egypt, that gets closer and closer, and then the relationship of both those countries to the Soviet Union and the communist camp.

How does this series of escalating conflicts?

So for the Baghdad pact, the funding of the Aswan Dam, the Arab need for arms in the face of Israeli aggression, and most consequentially, of course, the Suez Crisis.

How does it all drive first?

Egypt and Syria, increasingly close to one another, while, at the same time, both countries begin to deepen their relationship with the USSR and the wider communist block or relationship that's economic, cultural, political, and above all else, about defense.

In the case of Syria, actually, Syria had taken a stronger stance against what was basically a Truman orchestrated policy in the region in the early 50s.

Daniel, it would be it might be useful to look at it in the context of what the imperial powers were planning.

So there was a Truman era, and then there was an Eisenhower era, when it comes to dealing with this region, with some continuities between them.

Incidentally, by the way, I have a great colleague of mine, Nathan Citino, is now working on a major study of the Truman side of this equation in relation to the Middle East.

So I think we'll have some exciting new material on that once he completes that work.

But for now, if you look at the initial stages under Truman, They were promising so-called aid, uh, developmental aid, uh, to the countries uh, that were newly independent in the Middle East and specifically in the herb side of it, uh, so that they could entangle them in the Western bloc.

So we spoke about some of the problems relating to that.

One is that there was an Israeli they mentioned that Arab countries could never approve of to this equation, and there were demands for them to essentially drop the Palestinian cause.

Soon, the US, under Eisenhower, starts realizing that they can't pressure, in that direction, and that there is no point, in trying to force the Arab countries to seek some kind of agreement with Israel at this stage.

They were not going to find any response that is positive in that regard.

The 2nd issue with the with the American project under Truman, was that you had too many regional forces, political, forces, especially progressive ones, but also some of the ones that were liberal nationalists, that were keen to leave the realm of colonials.

They did not want to come back into the colonial world.

We spoke about this already, but that required then, uh, a new uh, thinking around how development can be carried out internally.

And in Syria, for example, the progressive or the government that had progressive representation in it that forms after the overthrow of Shishakli and the restoration. Of democratic life in that country, it starts looking for alternative sources for revenue and for funding development projects, projects other than these American developmental offers.

They reject the Western developmental offers, and they start considering things like taxing the tapline cooperation, for example, and taxing, increasing the charges for the British corporation that runs the Iraqi oil, Iraqi, uh, is transporting its oil via Syria, and they want to increase the charges around that.

They were exploring multiple options, all of which, of course, were affecting Western interests.

So we have this contradiction with the West.

It's based both on material factors like this, as well as geostrategic factors like the Palestinian cause.

They lead to a situation whereby the Western dictats in the region are not met favorably.

Now, in the case of Egypt, it's a bit more complicated.

A dinosaur starts by indicating that he's okay with receiving American aid, and he does receive it, actually, some of it.

It's just the American aid when it came to the key projects. Was not coming, especially the high dam, and also on the defense side.

It was being, it was not being provided adequately because of the Israeli side of the equation.

So, um, so we have a a serious issue there.

Secondly, when it comes to Egypt, Abdenasir wants aid, but it doesn't want alignment.

We spoke about this already.

So, Americans don't don't don't find the middle ground for him.

They can't seem to find a way to reach an understanding with him that will allow him to keep his red lines while not completely severing his connection with them or not completely heading into the Soviet camp.

So, eventually, they put him in a corner, and they force him to go Soviet, because they're telling him we can't provide you with the weapons you want, and we can't provide you with the main development funding that you need, to carry out your ambitious development projects for the country.

And it's in that context that is like, okay, there is another power out there in the world, there is another superpower.

I could turn to it.

And he establishes a relationship with the Soviet Union as a result.

Now, under Khrushchev, the Soviet policy is also different than it used to be.

Because Khrushchev is trying to find ways to leapfrog over the Western military alliances that the Americans had created with, of course, British help.

And he needs to find a way around the northern tier.

And the best way to do that is to strike deals with progressive national liberation, movements that may not be communists, and may not be entirely Soviet oriented.

But that have common grounds with the Soviet Union in the sense that they oppose the Western camp because of its colonialist character.

So that's a major departure from the old Stalinist line that was just denouncing old Borswell leaderships and that was pushing for, you know, you're either communist or you're not or you're not good. You know, and that was pushing more towards alignment.

The Soviets.

So in a way, what you're saying is, the Americans in the West demand alignment, Soviets actually don't, and that gives the Soviets an advantage in this, in this case.

They're way less demanding partners.

They're way less demanding partners.

That's partly, though, because they're weaker partners.

They don't have a history of presence in this region.

They don't have beltry bases.

They don't have, so anything they can gain is an advantage.

They're not incumbent colonial powers trying to protect everything they've conquered over the last, you know, centuries.

That is correct.

They may play that role in other parts of the world, but not here.

And let's not forget that the Soviet Union is seen as a product of a very important world historical event that is celebrated in this region and elsewhere.

The Russian revolution.

It has a progressive dimension to it that is celebrated by many progressive forces in that region.

So there is that added ideological dimension that helps its prestige, at least within the radical side in the region.

So how amid all these crises and the deepening ties between Syria and Egypt and the Soviet camp, how during that period are Egypt and Syria also coming closer together.

And I'm talking 5556 here.

So, 1st of all, the Berdad Pact situation we mentioned, by rejecting about that pact, Syria was actually supporting essentially Egyptian policy.

You'll find here that even though it did it for its own reasons, of course, the Syrian governments had their own dynamics and own reasons for rejecting the pact.

You had, by the way, uh, at some point, uh, Faris el Hudi government, uh, was trying to find a way to uh, reach an understanding with, with, with the West, but it had too many parliamentary representatives.

At this stage, you had 18 socialist deputies and one communist deputy, the only communist deputy in the Arab region, you know, Heidbekdash represented in the Syrian parliament.

You could not find a way to ignore that block and carry out an agreement.

So you had the internal situation in Syria, ensuring that it would have been very difficult for this Syrian government to betray the popular mood against signing pacts with these Western powers.

Now, in the case of Egypt, We know that the Nazir was following what was going on in Syria very closely.

He knew that Syria is only way out of regional potential regional isolation when it came to the issue of alignment.

Especially when it came to issues of alignment under a British sponsored formula, like this one.

So, of course, he tried to maintain as good a relationship with the Saudi leadership under King Saud at the time, but at the same time, he had to explore and follow what's going on in the Syrian side very closely.

As of yet, he did not have the power that he could fully rely on in Syria.

But increasing relationships were being developed.

Now, what helps him is you have, on the one hand, the communists are reducing their hostility to him in Syria, to some extent, because of the turn to the Soviet Union.

With the signing of the Czech arms deal, the Soviet Union, which, of course, Soviet Union support, with Soviet Union increasingly, establishing various forms of support for Egypt, with the negotiations around the high dam financing, you have, this is sending positive signals to Syrian communists.

Syrian Bathists are also beginning to evaluate their position in relation to Abdinas because they're beginning to see that this is not just another American backed coup of the sort that they had suffered from in Syria.

They're still mistrustful.

Of Abd the Nazer and the free officers as a whole, because they were suspicious that these military officers can only bring dictatorial regimes, and they were still at the stage, the bath was still insistent on democracy, at least the major figures within it.

That was not to last forever, as we shall see.

But at this stage, it's a party that is, that is committed to democracy and its official pronouncements and its thinking and you have a, therefore, um, a sense of also feeling that, that, uh, the pathway on which Syria, uh, uh, that Syria was on during those years, 5556 was a very positive one for political parties like the bath.

They were able to participate in political life.

They were able to participate in an electoral life, the democratic process enabled that was experienced in Syria at the time, enabled multiple movements to flourish.

During this time, the bath are gaining a lot of power.

And in that moment, in 1955, a key and very powerful bath aligned lieutenant colonel, Adnan al Malki, who's he's the deputy chief of staff of the Syrian army.

He was assassinated by Assyrian Social Nationalist Party military police sergeant.

Why was this assassination so consequential?

Did it, did it give the Bath an opportunity to repress their opponents the, the social nationalist followers of Anton Sada?

Yes, absolutely, Daniel.

At the same time, of course, assassination of Malki was a was a big problem for the bath.

You had a complicated set of circumstances that took place during that assassination.

One was the main, uh, the key figure in the cabinet that had been established around the time.

This was during the time of the government that was dominated by Khaled Alazim, who was foreign secretary at the time.

He was out of the country when this assassination took place.

It was, uh, and you know, this happened in uh, in April uh, 55.

Now, you had a situation where Malki's assassination also coincided with the another assassination that took place, which was of Akram Harani's brother in the same period.

And of course, Malchis was a much bigger event because of his stature in the in the military.

The, some of the key figures in the bath, uh, wanted actually a state of emergency to be imposed to deal with, because they saw this as part of a broader conspiracy against Syria, uh, and the broader conspiracy against the, uh, progressive political forces in Syria, especially the bath.

But, uh, you know, uh, that's not what happened.

But as well, as we'll be discussing soon.

They're not necessarily wrong.

They were not necessarily wrong.

Maybe, and this is something that is argued by some of their leaderships.

I mean, Harani, for example, he claims that had they done a state of emergency.

You know, he said, it talks about this in his memoirs, he assumes that a lot of the subsequent events could have been avoided, and that you would have had a much stronger, you know, anti-western block founded, you know, preempting the Western moves at this stage.

We don't know.

In any case, SSMP, like you mentioned, was outlawed in Syria.

I'm not so sure that was of great benefit to the bat or anybody else from, you know, in terms of the political life because by then the SSMP was a small party without much grounding in the military or the government.

You know, it was it was quite weak.

It still had major presence in the Syrian, in strange places, like the Syrian, uh, in news, uh, in Syrian radio.

Had a lot of SSMP members, from the Shishakli era.

They had managed to control that institution, but after the assassination of Melchi, we see a lot of them leaving and actually, eventually, their lead, the radio presenter, I think her name was Abla Huri, I'm I can't remember.

I think it's Ablahuri.

She ended up going to Radio London.

She goes to the BBC eventually.

So, um, we have this situation where the bath is gaining sympathy, however, in the context of this assassination, nevertheless.

Even though the legacy of Adnan Malki was not fully utilized by the bath leadership.

Michelle Affleck, was trying to downplay the Bathist association of Malki, and of course, it was known that he was, he was a Bathist connected person.

The fact that he was not, he was not actually enrolled in the party.

You know, it was it was more of a fellow traveler, you can say.

So during this period, with rising left anti-imperialist power in Syria.

We have the Bath party and the communists who have a history of extreme distrust and often hostility working together, but still very much distrusting each other.

How does this brief period of a progressive front work?

Yeah, well, there were factors that led to this progressive front to be established, obviously, uh, in this period, mainly that you had a clear, common threat, which was, uh, these these pacts, and and you needed to have, uh, unified social movements to deal with.

So, uh, we see the, the, this happening in a place like Jordan, for example, very clearly.

There, you have a united front government being established in the context of this period.

And that comes out of the unification of popular forces, into what came later to be referred to as the Jordanian national movement.

Uh, you know, that, that, that movement, of course, was, was based on an alliance between the kind of, uh, you know, uh, progressive uh, uh, figures like Suleiman Nabulsi, who uh, headed um, essentially a party that was patriotic.

But that, and had some socialist leanings, but mainly, you know, it had socialism in its name, actually, but, you know, it was, it was still part of a, um, less radical in its, in its, in its programs and in its orientations.

It represented the educated classes.

People like Nabusi himself. Who comes actually from a powerful family, a powerful landowning family in the city of Sultan, Jordan.

And but I went to the American University of Beirut, and had developed strong, you know, anti-colonial leanings.

And despite the fact that he also engaged with the established authorities, it served as a minister before in Jordan and he was even the Jordanian ambassador to Britain in the early 50s.

Now, you know, people like like him, the Harim Nimmer and others, they established a front.

With the Bathis, uh, who had a very active and growing presence in Jordan at the time.

And the bath was benefiting from very talented figures, like Dalari Maui, was very determined, and excellent organizer.

Like, of course, Bajad Abu Dhabi, you know, who had a very long and celebrated history of resistance against the British and Zionists in Palestine, but came to, you know, play a key role in the Jordanian bath in the 1950s, because as we mentioned regularly, at this stage, Jordanian, Palestinian politics were intertwined because of the unity of the West Bank, with Jordan.

So, uh, people like, like Bazat, uh, people like uh, Abdullah, Remaui, were in uh, regular conversations with uh, these nationalist leaderships, like uh, Seleman Ability.

And then the communists also were in constant discussion with them over the Baghdad pact.

So they form a coordinating committee.

And it becomes like a popular committee, and that leads to the unification of all the popular forces at the time against this pact.

Now, the Islamist take a slightly different position, and that becomes a subject of debate nowadays because, you know, sometime, actually recently in the Jordanian press, they were accused of standing with the regime during the Baghdad Pact demonstrations, and their representatives of the Muslim brother had denied that vehemently, and they mentioned the names of the people that were arrested from their movement.

So, you know, I don't think they were necessarily cheering for the pact, but they definitely were not the main block that worked towards preventing it from taking place.

And later on, of course, a couple of years later, 1957, they stand with the monarchy against what they see as a leftist attempt to take over the government through a coup and to overthrow the king.

So, on the 1st time that we see the Arab left unifying in an effective way, across the communist progressive nationalist divide, was during this period.

So, in Syria, we see similar developers taking place, although, of course, here in the Syrian case, it's not necessarily that the parties are working against the established government.

They're at this stage working within the organs of the state. Because they're they're actually represented in Parliament.

And nevertheless, you know, they have, of course, social mobilizations on the ground.

And there is there is a lot of coordination taking place when it comes to the question of rejecting the Western alliances, as well as the Western aid offers.

Which leads then to American paranoia in relation to Syria.

There's American paranoia, um, there, it's also encouraged, uh, by a variety of internal and external forces.

But this is the Eisenhower period, Daniel.

And um, in the Eisenhower period, uh, things develop, because uh, Eisenhower starts developing a doctrine around this part of the world.

That was the 6th episode of Fawara, the Diggs new series on 20th century Arab politics with Abdel Razakt 3D, who teaches history at Rice University, a scholar of Arab and Palestinian revolutionary movements.

He's the author of Monsoon Revolution, Republicans, Sultans, and Empires in Oman, and the co-author of The Palestinian Revolution, Digital Humanities website, an incredible resource that will be back online soon.

Thank you for listening to the Dig from Jackman magazine.

As Marks once said, after noting that, revolutions are the locomotives of history.

While other podcasts have only interpreted the world in various ways, our point is to change it, or posting new episodes every week.

The dig was produced by Alex Lewis.

Our associate producer is Jackson Roach, music by Jeffrey Brodsky.

Our communications coordinator is Sylvia Atwood, our senior advisors are Theorio Francos, and then maybe.

Check out our vast archives and newsletters at thedigradio.com.

Follow us on Twitter and also now Instagram at the Dig Radio, and please do find us wherever you get podcasts and subscribe to this podcast.

If it's on iTunes or Spotify or another such service, please also rate and review us positively.

Those reviews help introduce us to new listeners.

What really does that is you telling your friends to check out the pod.

Please make propaganda for us.

And do find us at patreon.com and make a monthly or annual contribution to keep this operation up and running strong.

Even a few bucks is huge. 