Thawra Epilogue: Genocide and Resistance


Opening:
Welcome to The Dig, a podcast from Jacobin Magazine. My name is Daniel Denvir, and I'm broadcasting this introduction On the Road from Vienna. This is the last of our three-part epilogue to our voluminous series Thawra, an extensive investigation into 20th century Arab politics with historian Abdel Razzaq Takriti.


Thawra is Arabic for revolution. It's a word that contains historical multitudes, diverse political radicalisms and revolts that have swept across Arab lands over the past century. Yes, this is the final installment of our three-part epilogue to Thawra, and so also the very last Thawra episode of any sort, with my dear friend Abdel Razzaq Takriti.


A brief recapitulation:
In this installment, Abed and I chronicle the Palestinian liberation struggles fight against the Israeli settler state over the last 20 years or so, from Hamas' victory in the 2006 legislative election through the Fatah attempted coup against Hamas, stoked as it was by the US and Israel that followed. We trace the aftermath. Following Hamas' seizure of power in Gaza in response to the failed coup, Israel imposed a brutal blockade.Tremendous force and resources converged on this small territory, packed with 2 million people, overwhelmingly the descendants of the Nakba, whose family members had been chased from their homes in what is now southern Israel. From 2007 on, the Israeli occupation military turned Gaza into an open-air prison, and every few years subjected it to devastating bombing campaigns, killing thousands of people. Israel's blockade and periodic bombardments of Gaza marked an escalation and also a continuation of a long strategy of attempting to partition the Palestinian people into smaller and smaller territorial, social, and political units.The 1948 expulsion of refugees beyond historic Palestine divided them from those who remained within the borders of the settler-colonial state, becoming Palestinian citizens of Israel. Then, in 1967, Palestinians of the newly-occupied West Bank, Gaza, and East Jerusalem were made into yet another category, distinct from both refugees outside historic Palestine and Palestinian citizens of Israel. Finally, after implementing the so-called disengagement plan in 2005, Israel hewed Gaza off in 2007, and made it into a distinct zone where Israel legitimated the exercise of the most extraordinarily brutal forms of domination and violence in a history of Zionist settler colonialism that is nothing but constant domination and violence.


Though the Palestinian Revolution's headquarters moved from Amman to Beirut to Tunis, Gaza is the longtime heart of Palestinian revolutionary politics. The birthplace of Yasser Arafat's father, of Hamas and Islamic Jihad, and the home of the PFLP's Guevara of Gaza. Gaza was then singled out for a specifically severe form of isolation and super lethal repression.These forms of extreme violence and oppression were made to seem okay to the outside world thanks to an Israeli campaign to single out Gazans for demonization. It was a campaign that built upon, but also went beyond, pre-existing and already extreme forms of anti-Palestinian racism prevalent in Israel and the West. A campaign that made Palestinian, and particularly Gazan, synonymous with terrorist, and that perversely reaffirmed that association precisely through unleashing such extreme forms of violence and repression against the people there.


And then came October 7th, as factions led by Hamas burst through and flew over the apartheid wall, enforcing the blockade, and launched an attack that resulted in the killing of more than 1,000 Israeli soldiers and civilians, with roughly 250 Israelis taken hostage into Gaza. What has followed through the present day for more than a year is a genocide against the people of Gaza. We can see Israel's morbid strategy at work.The more Arabs, Palestinians, Gazans they kill, the more normal they want to make it for Israel to kill Arabs, Palestinians, Gazans. The genocide has now expanded into a war on the West Bank, on Hezbollah, and on the people of Lebanon, and on the Houthi Yemeni government blockading naval traffic in solidarity with Palestine. Solidarity with Palestinian liberation has always been core to the Arab Revolution against Western colonialism.


And as we've discussed throughout the entirety of this series, Western imperialists and Zionist attacks on the Arab Revolution from the tripartite aggression against Nasser through today's priority efforts to normalize Arab state relations with Israel, they've always focused on isolating the Palestinian struggle from the broader region. That effort has clearly failed. Israel sells this region-wide belligerency as self-defense.


But few across the world believe such an obvious lie. All of you listening to this series certainly know much better. I'll leave this intro at that and let the interview speak for itself.It's been a real honor to spend this time with Abed, telling a history of Arab revolutionary politics that's almost entirely unknown in the West and not known well enough even in the Arab East. I have placed so much of my hope in the renewed internationalist turn taken by the left in the US and elsewhere. I'm so grateful that so many of you have accompanied us on this journey, and I do hope it helps you to continue to plot the way forward.


I believe Palestine will be free. What we are witnessing is absolutely monstrous. But they are the actions of a settler state that will not and cannot stem the tide of liberation.


Introducing the guest:
Here he is one last time for Thawra: Abdel Razzaq Takriti, who teaches history at Rice University, is a scholar of Arab and Palestinian revolutionary movements. He is the author of Monsoon Revolution, Republicans, Sultans and Empires in Oman, and the co-author of the Palestinian Revolution Digital Humanities website.


Interview:


Daniel: Let's turn back to Palestine. In 2006, Hamas won elections. In response, the US and Israel pushed Fatah to marginalize Hamas, and basically to not recognize the elections, which led to a violent conflict, a conflict between the factions that ended with Hamas taking power in Gaza in 2007.What followed, as most listeners who've gotten to this point of Thawra probably know, what followed was an Israeli blockade of Gaza interspersed over the years with recurrent, brutal military campaigns that Israeli leadership likened to mowing the lawn. Meanwhile, Israel intensified the settlement of the West Bank under increasingly extreme right-wing governments, while the PLO and Fatah had lost all credibility under Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas, whose security forces cooperate with the Israeli occupation. And yet, the Palestinian people continue their struggles, including, I mean, I could cite so many things, but including the remarkable events like the Great March of Return from Gaza in 2018 and 2019.


A civilian protest met with an absolutely brutal Israeli military response. Meanwhile, we saw Trump make Arab state normalization with Israel, the so-called Abraham Accords, a top priority. And it very revealingly has remained a top priority under Biden.


There is so much here and we have to cover it really succinctly. Walk us, walk us through the end of the Second Intifada to the eve of October 7th.


Abed: All right. So after the Second Intifada, the Palestinian people were in a crisis. The Second Intifada was supposed to be the Intifada of Al-Aqsa defending the holy sites.


It was supposed to be the Intifada of Independence. That's the other name that was given to it. An idea that if Palestinians were not able to achieve independence in the West Bank and Gaza through the so-called peace process, which was a total sham and proved itself, of course, to be a sham, then they will have to engage in resistance, including armed resistance, to be able to achieve that goal.


The main theory was unless you create and inflict significant damage on the Israeli economy and political system, but also unless the Israeli population itself feels part of the pain that the Palestinians were feeling, then there will be no change. That was the basic idea that was promoted by the main Palestinian groups that led the military aspect of the Second Intifada. Of course, there were other aspects.There was a great deal of mobilization going on, and people forget about that. There were protests and there were many. There was a huge spectrum of resistance going on, but the armed aspect of the Second Intifada was stronger than the First Intifada, for example, which tended to rely more on civic mobilization and organization with some armed elements.


But the failure of the Second Intifada to achieve that objective meant that you had a serious crisis within the Palestinian body politic. Part of that failure we've discussed before, there was an unfortunate coincidence between 9-11 and the Second Intifada. The war and terror in the Second Intifada.


And Sharon was really one of the few actually strategically very intelligent Zionist leaders. There's this myth that they're very smart strategists. Actually, it's not true.


There's very few figures in Zionist history that were very good strategists. One of them was Ariel Sharon, even though he's an awful person, of course. In fact, incredibly evil, I would say.I have no problem using more language in relation to people like him. But his overall vision, he was the architect of the siege of Beirut and forcing the PLO out of it. Now, he was the architect in this period of trying to, again, force any form of organized Palestinian politics into the margins within the occupied territories in the post-Oslo period.


So people like him did not have to make the peace process fail because already it was bound to fail given the nature of all Zionists, especially including labor Zionists, for using it just as a cover for expansion. So, you know, they had a consensus on that. But Sharon was thinking, you know what, I'm going to do something even more aggressive than that.I'm going to engage in this dialectic of, first of all, provoking major uprising through visiting the Haram with thousands of settlers, through increasing the pressure on the people, and through providing a closed cul-de-sac when it comes to any form of political process. But at the same time, you know, he was like, my main objective is to weaken any form of independent Palestinian leadership, ensure that Palestinian leaderships are fully absorbed into the Israeli security matrix. A lot of people do not understand this point, including in Palestine, that in the Arafat period, this is why when people just accuse Arafat of just being a subcontractor for occupation, that is not true.


An aspect of the structures he created was subcontracting, but he had another aspect that was resisting. He was embroiled in both processes in a unique way. That's why his legacy is mixed.


Daniel: And he was struggling with actual dilemmas that confronted him as the leader of a national liberation struggle that was facing repeated enormous defeats thanks to the overwhelming power, a raid against him.


Abed: Correct. Now, of course, any radical historian will critique individual leadership, their style of engaging with things there, and also, of course, the set of strategic miscalculations that included Oslo itself. But they have to be contextualized, and he cannot be accused of not trying to also have a parallel structure of independent Palestinian political processes going on under the Israelis.


There is a key difference with what happened afterward, after he was marginalized. He was marginalized for a reason. There's a reason why the Clintons attacked him, and Barak attacked him, and later on, of course, Sharon ensured that he was isolated and then eventually killed.


It had to do with the fact that he had another structure that was developing at the same time, which was to challenge Israeli authority, and it was actually a structure geared towards developing some military capacity on the part of the Palestinians. Now, he failed. He was not able to get the weapons he wanted.The weapons shipments that he actually sought were caught by the Israelis. He denied ever ordering them, but we all know that he did, you know, all of this. And there's nothing wrong with that, because, oh, the Americans are always okay with the Israelis getting armed.


They send them the weapons. But if Palestinians get armed, God forbid, you know, Arafat wants to have some protection for this people. At the end of the day, he gets assassinated.


We can't conclusively prove it, but there is a lot of evidence that he was poisoned. In the meantime, Sharon is carrying out a plan that is geared towards controlling the Palestinian leaderships completely, ensuring a new transition in which the PA, which is this structure that should never have existed. It's an interim structure.


You know, the leadership of the Palestinian people technically should be the PLO. The PA is just a division that is created out of the PLO signing agreement with the Israelis. It's not meant to overtake the role of the PLO, but it does at this stage.Why is that important, Daniel? Because the PLO represents all of the Palestinian people, including the refugees outside Palestine, whereas the PA only represents the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. Our parliament in exile, the Palestine National Council, which is the PLO's parliament, represents everyone, whereas the legislative council, the PLC, which is under the PA, the only people eligible to vote for it are West Bank and Gaza ID holders.


So there's a situation where they're shrinking Palestine. Already, the Abu Mazen's of the world have accepted that shrinkage. And unfortunately, the Aser Arafat's of the world paved the way towards it by making these Faustian deals, essentially.


Now, but we reach to a stage where Sharon now is saying, okay, I'm going to ensure that I defeat any project that tries politically to counter the Israeli vision. And I need to nip in the bud even this peace process in any prospect of a Palestinian state. And what that means is my main objective will be so-called disengagement from Gaza, which means essentially isolating it and turning it into an open air prison and dealing with it in terms of the logic of total containment. As for the West Bank, I'm just going to grab land there left, right, and center. In that sense, I'm following the policies of my predecessors, but I'm doing it smarter than them. Because I'm absorbing this whole endeavor into the war and terror language.


I'm going to turn it into a conversation about Israel's security, not about anything else. Now, they were doing that already in Oslo. If you actually follow how the Israelis talk with US administrations around this, and how they talk with Europeans about this, and how they declare their actual real objectives, the US and the Europeans all know that they have no intention of creating a Palestinian state on the West Bank or anywhere else.


They always say that Israel is strategically very narrow in terms of its territory, and it needs the military depth offered by the West Bank, especially the Jordan Valley, to prevent any land invasion and to prevent any overthrow of its government. Therefore, it has to essentially perpetuate its rule there forever. But what they're offering is a bunch of cantons and self-rule in certain areas with a right to enter whenever they want and exit whenever they want.And of course, accompanied by a huge, huge land grab. And that is the logic that they historically have been pursuing and that they're pursuing right now. Which to place things in context means that they've ultimately rejected the greatest deal ever offered by the leadership of a colonized population to a colonizer group in history.


Which is, oh, take 78% and give us just 22% but with real sovereignty. They weren't willing to do that. I've said that before, but I'll keep reminding our listeners about it.


Now, that means this project that Sharon had meant that first, you get Abu Mazen anointed as the next leader. Already, Abu Mazen had been working with the Americans and the Israelis before. When he was placed as prime minister under pressure for them, under Arafat, and he was meant to create these policies and implement these policies of what they called rationalizing the state, combating corruption, all of it, all of that, which was actually had nothing to do with that.These policies were all about narrowing down the amount of maneuvering space that the Palestinians had, the Palestinian leadership had. So it was about making fewer security services, increasing the streamlining process of the cooperation of these security services with the Israelis and their coordination with the Americans, all of that kind of stuff. Now Abou Ammar was able to outmaneuver him.


We talked about this before. Now he comes back as Yasser Arafat gets killed and he's promoted to the Palestinian populace, to the Palestinian people as some kind of a, somebody that will deliver a new era of stability and peace and potentially even independence. And the fathers are very difficult, Daniel, for the Palestinian people to carry through because it's a heavy thing to carry.


You're besieged constantly, you're under full mobilization. It's again, a people that doesn't have enormous means and it has to fight a state that is backed by all the global powers. So the social cost of an intifada is high.So when people were coming, being given these big promises, Abu Mazen is going to come and save you, they ended up being, okay, let's try it out. So we have this interesting situation where the minute Arafat dies or gets killed, we have enormous outpour of grief, big funeral despite of all the people's critiques of the hundreds of thousands flowing to the streets. But at the same time, there is this moment of, okay, maybe this is the time when a new page will be open so that people can at least breathe a little.


Nobody had serious belief that the US or the Israelis will bring an era of real peace or whatever, but at least breathing space was something that people felt it could happen. And that, of course, was not what happened next. So, the Abu Mazen era starts with these big promises, Daniel, but of course, everything is frustrated.


Israelis have no intention. They expand their settlements. They create a situation that is unbearable.Now, in the meantime, you have elections called for the Legislative Council, and Hamas does really well, really, really well. Even Christian villages in Palestine voted for Hamas in this period. And that was really a vote of no confidence in the failed policies that have been adopted by the Fatah leadership, and vote of no confidence in the whole Oslo approach.


Now, Abu Mazen had basically instituted a set of policies that were geared towards essentially freezing any form of struggle while carrying out what he considered to be state building, which was in fact nothing other than introducing neoliberalism on a mass scale in the West Bank primarily. So you have an expansion in this period of a set of policies that came to be associated with what we call Fayadism, in relation to Salam Fayad, the prime minister that eventually gets put in place by Abu Mazen. And the whole theory was, if we build a state, the Americans are saying that we're not ready for self-rule.We're going to prove them wrong. We're going to show the Europeans that we can build state structures. And then somehow that's going to solve the problem they're going to give us a state.


And this is part of the theory. The other part was saying, if we bring in greater material prosperity, then people will more likely stay on their land. That was another argument that was used by Fayadists.


What they in fact created was a structure that really undermined the capacity at resistance, because they brought in the banks, they brought in loans, they brought in mortgages. There's a huge literature on this, a book that just appeared by a common friend of ours that deals with this neoliberal aspect, Palestine is throwing a party and the whole world is invited. That's by Kareem Rabia.What that shows you is you have this process going on on the one hand. But there's a detachment from the political reality, which is Israelis have no intention of creating a state. This has nothing to do with whether you show yourself to be responsible or not, or whether you create neoliberal forms of development or not, which of course we know does not benefit actually the working classes.


It just creates a new elite in any particular space while inflicting relations of debt and dependency on the part of others. Anyways, Palestine politically then is confronted with a major issue. We have Hamas getting elected.


They try actually to create a national unity government. Initially, people were hopeful. Maybe there will be a national unity government coming out of this.


For a minute, the Saudis even play a good role in this. They create the Mecca Accords and Fatah and Hamas have a dialogue. Then the Americans come and crack down, and the EU follows with them.


They're like, Hamas are terrorists. This is again an organization that decided to leave military struggle after the Second Intifada. Second Intifada did not just end with Abu Ammar's death.It ended with Hamas deciding to stop military operations, including what's referred to in the English language as suicide bombings or in Arabic as Amaliyat Istishadiah. This situation came from Hamas itself, even though Israel had assassinated its biggest leader and founder, Ahmad Yaseen. So they showed an openness to establish a political process.


At the time, by the way, Jimmy Carter was saying, look, they're being open about this. We really need to engage with them. But of course, he was ignored by the establishment that was seeking to perpetuate the prevention of the creation of a Palestinian state at the time.


You know me, I'm not a two-stater, but I'm actually saying that even that is too much for these people, for the American officials and Israeli officials and the EU officials at the time, despite their claims that they want to promote that agenda. That's not the truth. So they used the war on terror language to essentially destroy a political process by ensuring that Hamas has no seat on the table.They said, we are not going to work with any unity government like this. Already, structurally, they've controlled things from a political economy perspective. They've controlled things by placing the PA under their patronage.


It was so dependent on now EU aid and US aid. They were saying, we're going to cut all funding to the PA if this government continues. They imposed an internal crisis within Palestine and amongst the Palestinian people.


They then encouraged a further marginalization of Hamas by carrying out what they call the Dayton Plan, which is, you know, there's this figure, Mohammed Dahlan, he comes in and they support him to enforce this plan to essentially carry out a coup against Hamas. So what Hamas does, it carries out a preemptive coup against this American attempt. And again, it's interesting that we're talking about coups, Daniel, because even in places that are not independent, Americans were creating coups.I mean, we spoke about the US instituting the first coup in the region under Hosni Al-Zaeem with disastrous effects. And now it was trying to do a coup in the region many years later, both relating to Palestine, interestingly. Anyways, Hamas preempts that, it carries out its own coup, and then we end up with it taking over essentially power in Gaza.


Now, what that does is, it separates West Bank from Gaza, creates internal, factional conflict between Hamas and Fatah. But more importantly, it allows the Israelis to come and say Gaza is a terrorist enclave. They use this language of the war on terror.


And they start dehumanizing the whole space. When we speak of the genocide today, by the way, it's a byproduct of many, many years, at least 17 years, of completely dehumanizing everyone in Gaza. Once you start using this war on terror, everybody is a terrorist, even the babies are terrorists, the women are terrorists, and you've already, through the war on terror, established the principle that in relation to terrorists, you can do whatever you want, which means kill them all, destroy them all, burn them all.That way of thinking becomes popularized. And here you see why this Sharon strategy was so effective in this period. It creates a situation where politically there is paralysis when it comes to the Palestinian angle, but also where there's so much pressure placed on the people in Gaza.


And in the meantime, the true objective of the Zionist project in the West Bank is expanding hugely through just more and more and more colonization and settlements. Now, in the meantime, Gaza was developing an infrastructure for self-defense. Throughout these years, they began to be like, OK, now we're under siege, so we have to develop tunnels.


So initially, tunnels were used for smuggling, you know, supplies, including food, by the way, but cars, donkeys, all sorts of things were smuggled through them. You know, there's an excellent dissertation on tunnels at Columbia University by Hadil Asali. Hopefully, it will be published in book form sometime soon.But there's a whole world around that that develops. We get also the development of attempts to, again, train fighters, develop capacity to establish better militias and so on on the part of Hamas. Now, that essentially signifies an emerging new mode of practice for Hamas.


They were no longer relying on the sort of tactics that had been developed by other movements worldwide, including the IRA, for example, and other movements that were, for example, relying on bombings in cities and in civilian areas. Here now, they were thinking more in terms of adopting strategies that entailed strengthening their own ability to project power, developing missiles, developing AI solutions, other solutions that were technological developments in them. And while at the same time having better supply lines and storage lines.


The Israelis adopted mowing the lawn that you referred to, to say, okay, in order to suppress that and weaken their capacity, every once in a while we'll attack. And that way we can keep the siege going, but also we can drain whatever capacity building they engage with in the moments in between different major crises.


Daniel: And terrorize the population by killing a few thousand people.


Abed: Every time you kill two or three thousand, you know, each time, and then you injure, of course, tens of thousands, and then you move on to the next phase after a few years, you know, you go into a negotiations and then you move on to the next phase. At some point, Hamas was trying to think about how to break that cycle. That's where the Great March of Return develops.


There were different groups in Gaza. Of course, it was a broader mobilization than just Hamas, but Hamas did participate in that. Their idea was like, okay, so we've tried different methods.


A lot of them used the armed struggle. How about now we do the biggest civic mobilization ever and just put everybody on the border, say we are refugees. We come from these areas that are just behind this fence, you know, open the land for us, allow us to return.


And let's stop the siege, okay. Of course, there had been attempts to break the siege before. You remember the Mavi Marmara attempts to send boats.There were solidarity movements that tried to do that. Israelis went in and massacred the solidarity people on that ship. And of course, because they were above international law and above the law, you know, they escaped without punishment.


There were multiple offense. With great march of return, they decide, we're gonna kill a lot of people, we're gonna wound a lot of people. They were shooting people in the legs.


They were shooting people. They were causing long-term disabilities. Why is this interesting when we're talking about the run-up to October 7, Daniel?


All the regions that were border regions between Gaza and the neighboring Israeli colonies, those regions that suffered heavy, heavy casualties over the course of these attacks, they had suffered more than 6,000 killed during that decade of constant attacks, and they had suffered more than 100,000 injuries in that period. So, you know, the estimates vary. There's estimates that are bigger.There's estimates that are slightly lower. But the total numbers were huge. And that meant that this is an area where there's a lot of anger against the colonies nearby, against the Israeli army and its violence, and against everything that was going on.


There's been years of siege, years of economic de-development, to use Sarah Roy's apt term in relation to Gazah. And all of that accumulation explodes in October 7th.


Daniel: On October 7th, 2023, Hamas led various Palestinian factions in launching Operation Al-Aqsa Flood, a major attack launched from Gaza on Israeli military and civilian targets that killed more than 1,000 Israeli soldiers and civilians and resulted in, I think, roughly 250 Israelis taken hostage into Gaza. The Israeli response, of course, has been the unspeakably horrific genocide that continues to unfold as we speak, every single minute that we've been recording Thawra, even now nearly a year later. And we'll talk about the genocide in a moment.But first, I want to discuss this military operation. How should we think about Aqsa flood? I feel like it's almost impossible to have a substantial discussion about this because of, you know, on the one hand, the demonization of all Palestinian violence, but also because of the violence committed against Israeli civilians, even as that violence was nothing like the atrocity propaganda that we saw cooked up by Israel and its friends in the US government and media.


How should we analyze October 7th in terms of both the historical forces that brought it about and then in terms of how it actually played out and what it meant in Palestine and for Israel and also, of course, for the region and the world?


Abed: So Daniel, let's start by stating the obvious, which is that there has been a huge media campaign from minute one during October 7th to portray what was happening in October 7th as a unique case of Palestinian barbarism, which, of course, goes into the usual colonial registry. Beheaded babies, raped women, all of that, which, of course, later on, we found out that there's no evidence to any of that. In fact, these were made-up stories created by Israeli propagandists, including from the settler movement.They were then propagated by the highest echelons of American power and so on. That does not mean that there was no violence against civilians on October 7th, and it's important to make the distinction between violence and the barbarization and the bestialization of Palestinians that took place on that day and since that day. Point number two, what happened on October 7th is also a question that is still not fully resolved, not the least, because now we've established, and Israeli media actually has established that the Israeli army played a big role in the civilian death toll there through their application of the Hannibal Doctrine, and actually I was one of many Palestinians that pointed out to that fact early on, and we were being accused of trying to hide atrocities and cover up atrocities.


Daniel: People who pointed this out were treated as conspiracy theorists essentially.


Abed: As well. So you were either accused of trying to justify the killing of civilians or to cover up killing, or you were accused of being a conspiracy theorist who was utterly mad. Now all the evidence was already pointing out to this idea, but also the reason why it was clear that there was a heavy Israeli involvement, to me at least, was that I'm very familiar with Hamas' political outlook and strategic outlook in general.


And I'm familiar with the debates that led to October 7 within Hamas. There was a huge debate that was raging on what is to be done to break the deadlock that Gaza had been suffering. Remember, there had been a suffocating siege that had lasted for a decade and a half now, more than a decade and a half.


And nobody was finding an appropriate way for breaking out of that. This coincided with an extreme push on the part of successive US administrations to try to get the Israeli project completely normalized in the region, and to have peace accords signed by everybody. Trump made major headway in that direction.He gave the Palestine file and the Arab region file as a whole to his son-in-law Kushner, who comes from not only a corrupt family and is not only actually intellectually dim and politically limited, but is also extremely right-wing. And this person has been part of a family tradition of supporting the more extreme elements of the settler movement inside the Israeli colonial state. So under his leadership, there had been this absorption of Israel into the regional map, and they got the United Arab Emirates to sign agreements, they got Bahrain, they got Sudan, under enormous pressure, of course, and with incentives.


And now we were left with a situation where they were eyeing the big prize, which is Saudi Arabia, and there were clear indications that this is what Biden is focusing on. In fact, he was announcing it publicly. He did not want to see a resolution to the Palestinian cause.


And by the way, yesterday, the United States representative to the UN, there's been this video circulating over her comments. I'm sure you've seen them. She's saying, well, this is not the right moment for Palestinians.They're not ready. All of this colonial talk like that for statehood. But in addition to that, they keep on insisting on using the language of both sides have to come to an agreement.


Well, what does that mean? Israelis, they have to approve our being, our independence, our life. And this is again, within the narrow circles of the greatest deal that was offered to a settler colony in history.


So people like me would not even accept that deal because it doesn't give us the bare minimum of our rights. So to go back, so this is the regional situation. It's also coinciding and hence the title of the operation with the invasion of the Aqsa Mosque that was taking place regularly, successive invasions.But since the election of the latest Israeli cabinet, you had two ministers that have been very involved, in fact three ministers that have been very involved in these invasions and also an entire government that is kind of encouraging that. They want to take over the Aqsa Mosque and they want to implement the formula they were implementing in the Abrahamic Mosque in Hebron, which is a disaster for Palestinian Muslim worshipers on so many levels. So you have all of these factors coming in together, and none of this can be possibly understood by any Palestinian other than a situation where there's a liquidation of the Palestinian cause taking place.


Because also when you take into account the expediting settlement construction that was taking place, the complete takeover of the West Bank that is being prepared, all of the other regional factors combined, it was clear that something had to be done. Now what can be done becomes a question. There's no regional power to depend on.You know, nobody's going to liberate Palestine from outside Palestine. And there is deadlock everywhere. And you always had a debate within Hamas on how to take things in a different direction.


Now Sinwar, their recent leader, their current leader, was somebody that came out of Israeli jail, Israeli prison, he was a political prisoner. He believed that the only language that Israelis understood was the language of power. Not necessarily violence, by the way.


He was more sophisticated than that. Language of power. He wanted to project power.


And he wanted to also create a sense of mobilization that would lead to some kind of a deal that would at least, at the very least, relieve some of the pressure on Jerusalem and the West Bank, but also lead to breaking the siege on Gaza. And his idea, based on historic precedent, was that Israelis respond well to hostage exchanges. And here, by the way, one added variable that I forgot to mention is, of course, the political prisoners.Palestinians are in prison. They're actually hostages in Israeli jails. There's thousands of them there.


So, how do you release them? How do you create better conditions? How do you break the political deadlock?


How do you break the siege and everything else? The idea was you do a purpose of operation that could show that, A, militarily, Israelis can be infiltrated, and they can be, you know, given blows. They might have a much stronger advantage in terms of regular army warfare, of course.


There's no comparison. But selective and targeted operations can cause serious damage for them. And this was why they were targeting the Eridz Crossing and other crossings into Gaza.It was saying like this wall that you built, this whole fortress that you built to control our people, to destroy them, can be broken. And in the process, there will be heavy targeting of the military. But also, if there happens to be a chance to take any hostages, whether they're civilian or military, that has to be maximized so that they can be done in a sort of prisoner of war exchange of sorts.


That would lead to political negotiation, potentially. And that would restore Palestine into the map, a dramatic move like this would tell Arab governments, you can't erase us from the equation. You tell the United States, you can't erase us from the equation, etc.


This was the thinking behind it. Now, the practice was, of course, very different. I don't think that Sinwar or anybody else would have predicted that the Israelis would have decided to implement the Hannibal doctrine on this scale, which is the doctrine that says, if you have any situation where prisoners, Israelis are taken prisoner, then you kill everybody, including the prisoners.And we saw this in multiple kibbutzs and elsewhere. I don't think they could have predicted that there would have been a lack of, let's say, discipline when it came to crossing the borders from Gaza on the part of the people in the areas neighboring those territories that surround Gaza. And these areas I've mentioned before had been brutalized by the Israeli state for a long time.


There's personal vendettas to be had. There are people that have lost many relatives, people that have lost legs and limbs. And, you know, it's a horrible world there.


They've been experiencing October 7 of much bigger magnitude for a long, much longer time. So when Israelis come now and say, oh, we're traumatized, well, you know what? The Palestinians are much more traumatized.


And especially those border areas in Gaza and the north. So it would have been difficult to predict what kind of situation would happen there. Okay.And it would be difficult to predict what sort of reactions will be taken by the Israeli military, even without the Hannibal Doctrine. You know, places like that music festival elsewhere, there was a unit placed there. People tell you, oh, it's just a happy festival for peace.


Well, it's actually next to like a big base, but it's also next to the world's biggest prison, Gazah. You know, there was an exchange of fire that took place there. And then later on, of course, the activation of the Hannibal Doctrine, helicopters, bombing cars, all of that did happen.


Okay. So all of this combined, what it indicates is that you had a set of objectives that were based on a certain calculation around predictable scenarios from the past, that did not work quite the way it was intended in the present. There was no way that also Sinwar would have been able to predict that the US response would be to authorize a full genocide.And I don't think any of us would have imagined it on this scale. There are people that will tell you, yeah, yeah, we've always known the Israelis are violent, that the Americans are violent, it should have been thought of that way. Actually, this is teleological.


I mean, the amount of authorization that took place against the whole world on the part of the US is astonishing. So this is to put things in context. Can you have a rational conversation like this?


Let's think of Hamas as having a plan, for example, or having political objectives, or basing their policy on scenarios from the past, as opposed to just being barbarian forces just out there to suck the blood of Israelis. I mean, that's the portrayal they want us to restrict the conversation in that they're a terrorist, they don't think about anything other than killing people and killing them in the most grotesque ways possible. Now, ironically, that's actually what's happening on the part of the genociders.There are unbelievable atrocities taking place as a result of the complete dehumanization and destabilization of the Palestinian people on the part. One added note I'm going to add, and this is going to be difficult for people to hear here, but I'll say it. If you want to understand Hamas, Hamas is a political organization.


You want to understand it, go read their documents. They're available. Their actual charter, people keep referring to the 88 charter, taking it out of context also.


It's not a charter that is somehow produced by oppressed people who have got to jail, have lost relatives, have lost. No, it just came out of the blue and it's describing Israelis in negative ways and wants to cut them out of the blue. But actually, even that is not advocating death for the sake of death.


As for 2017, it was a much more sophisticated document, which supersedes that charter. Nobody's talking about it, articulates political demands. It says clearly that Hamas is not targeting Jews, does not want to target Jews, and that what it intends is a political future that includes Jews.On a note for the left, and there's a big debate now there, and some people misunderstand me when I say, it's not time for you to spend time on what strategies and what tactics Palestinians should follow. You know, I've said that, I'll continue to say it. We've had a long history of strategies and tactics implemented, and we've had many different parties, including Marxist ones, on the political scene.


People will attack you, saying, no, why aren't you critiquing Hamas and so on and so forth? That's not the point. I have fundamental ideological differences with Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood as a whole.


We don't come from the same tradition. I don't base my worldview on religion to begin with, okay? However, if you're asking me to say that they don't have anti-colonial objectives, then I'm not going to say that because that's wrong.There will be major disagreements on pretty much the whole world view, and the left will have that. But what we cannot also participate in is this demonization that's designed to facilitate genocide. And what we cannot participate in is a sort of almost a patronizing colonial discussion that assumes that Palestinians aren't having these conversations internally about Hamas and every other faction on the scene, except that they have actually this conversation based on much more knowledge.


I'll be very honest with you, Daniel. I haven't seen much knowledge about Hamas or Palestinian political formations as a whole in the Western scene. There aren't even good books on them.


Hardly. Few ones out there. Most of the books are war and terror books.Good books on Palestinian organizations, three, four, five, there's hardly any information. People are making determinations based on total derivative sources and they're not probing deeply enough into this. We must have always conversations and sober conversations, but the number one conversation now is to stop the genocide.


Daniel: It's hard to know what to say about the Gaza Genocide in such little time, and the genocide is, of course, why we decided to make Thawra in the first place. So I guess I'll ask this. How should we think about this genocide that Israel's committing in terms of how it fits into the histories we've been detailing here?


How does the genocide fit into the longer history of Zionist settler colonialism, apartheid and ethnic cleansing, and of Palestinian resistance to that project? Why, at this moment, just over a century after the Balfour Declaration, why was it genocide that becomes Israel's move after so much brutal violence? Why do we have this unprecedented, totally eliminationist move from Israel?


Abed: Because they can get away with it, Daniel, and they figured out that they can get away with it. So that's number one. The Zionists always test the waters.They'll see how far the West will go with them, and they'll see what is the limit of acceptable action, and they'll reach the limit and they'll try to stretch it. And what they've found out now, the lesson they've learned, is we can actually get away with the total killing of the Palestinian people, starting with Gaza, but potentially elsewhere. We can actually work towards eradicating these people using Western money and weapons, particularly American money and weapons, and diplomatic cover, and nobody will say a word.


There won't be any major repercussions. We'll come out even as heroes and victims. We'll get standing ovations in American elected spaces, Congress and Senate.


Point number two, Zionism always has to be understood as a colonial continuum, as part of colonial continuum. And it is, to go back to that old saying by Patrick Wolfe, colonialism is a structure, not an event. And I think he's right on that.


You can't understand it as an event, or even a series of events. It's a structure. It has a logic to it.In Palestine, the eliminationist logic was always there in Zionism. There were other logics in operation too, by the way. And this is the bit that, where I think we have to have a more nuanced position than Wolff's and others.


There's that particular form of settler colonialism has an element of, actually, I'll copy the title of Chaim Weizmann, the founder of that, the title of his biography is Trial and Error. They have a bit of trial and error going on. So elimination is part of what they do when they can.


Ethnic Cleansing is part of what they do when they can. But, of course, structurally, the ideal scenario is elimination. If they can get away with having no Palestinians there, either through elimination or ethnic cleansing, that would be the best scenario for them.Because the goal of Zionism is the biggest amount of territory possible with the least amount of Palestinian Arabs on it, and the maximum number of Jews on it. This is their objective. There have been moments in Zionist thinking where some people were saying, well, we should place ourselves within certain limits, because that will be more acceptable to the international community, make us look better.


But also it could normalize our situation.


Daniel: We can do some form of apartheid instead.


Abed: Yeah. So either you do... The ones that thought of themselves as liberals would have said they don't even want that.


They just want a small independent Palestinian state on a tiny portion of the territory, and then they can feel good about themselves as great humanitarians who give the Palestinians something. The majority, actually, within those circles were opting for an apartheid model. And then you had another current, which is the current that's currently in power.And that one wants to take things even further. They're like, no, when we can drive them out, we will. When we can kill them all, we will.


By the way, all three currents are based on a diminished notion of Palestinian humanity. And in the case of the third one, it's not an existing, as far as they're concerned. We're fair game.


Our lives are fair game. They can do whatever they want with it. In fact, some of them think they have an injunction to kill as many as possible using Amalek, including the Prime Minister.


These people, Daniel, have, I mean, if you look at the portfolios of the people in the Israeli cabinet now, and of course they represent the majority of the Zionist movement, to be honest with you. Look at Yoav Gallant. He's named after Operation Yoav, which led to the ethnic cleansing of the whole of the south of Palestine, the areas south of Hebron, east of Gaza, these areas.


These people are proud of the record of ethnic cleansing. The Israeli school system is geared towards that. Israeli university system encourages that.The whole of society is militarized. This is not some random difference of opinion between people with this. All of them are in agreement, because all of them are socialized out.


There's a great film, actually, an old film, but I encourage people to watch it, by a radical Israeli filmmaker that is absolutely brilliant. It's called The Yitzkor. That film tracks indoctrination in the school system.


How it's all designed towards entering the military and viewing the whole society as some kind of collective Masada standing in the face of these barbarians around it. The amount of stuff that is happening at the moment, ideologically there, but also a complete... Sometimes people refer to it as a shift to the right.


I don't think it's a shift to the right. I think it's actually settler colonialism reaching a certain more intense state. This happened, we saw this in Algeria before with the Pieds-noirs.


At certain points, they were given very good deals by the native population. Like the Algerian national movement at some point was saying, just give us French passport. And they wouldn't do it.They get so arrogant. The hubris becomes so extreme. They think they can free the native with complete disregard.


So what ended up happening, of course, in the case of the Algerians, it drove them into total revolution. Same in Haiti. We know the story of Toussaint and Desalines.


And why Desalines had to take out the white from the Haitian flag in that voodoo ceremony in which he announced a new policy. We know why he had to implement a policy that was not seeking anything less than total revolution in relation to the oppressive slave owners in Haiti. All of this is now playing out in Palestine.


The settler always takes an extreme position. And the eradication of Native political life is definitely just the first step towards that. It can let them later on take forms where they try to actually eradicate life itself.


I don't think it's going to work, Daniel, by the way.There are very profound differences between Palestine and places where elimination actually worked. In Afro-Asian settings, elimination has not been as successful by the colonial powers because they were not able to do a project of overwhelming people demographically in the same way. But they're trying now.


They're doing it in sectional terms. They're eliminating sections of the Palestinian people now. So, Ghazza now, we're at over 10 percent, depending on the statistical estimates that you follow.


So, the Lancet estimates just under 200,000. If you follow, there's been now the head of Public Health at Edinburgh has now updated that estimate to the end of the year. We're hitting more than 300,000 now.


If you take into account the death by disease, which of course in settler colonial settings, that's usually actually the most common way of eradicating a society and eliminating it. So, we're heading into that direction. But there's also the elimination of institutions, of hospitals, of schools, of urban structures.I recommend that our listeners Google an article that was published very early on during the genocide by Giora Eiland, who had been advocating, by the way, the genocide policy for a long time. He was the national security head under Sharon. He fought with Sharon because he thought Sharon was too soft, if you can believe it.


He has been advocating complete removal of Ghazah's population into Sinai, into other places for a long time. He wrote an article in ynetNews that was basically laying out the plan for this genocide. Everything he said was happening, and we knew it early on that people like him, now their theories are becoming dominant and they're going to be put into practice.


Daniel: Remarkably, a Pew survey I saw a few months ago, it found that just 4% of Israeli Jews believed that the Israeli military had gone too far in Gaza, not exactly surveying people on the most sort of strident critiques, just too far, 4%.


Abed: Yeah, and more than 43% believe that Palestinian political prisoners should be raped, they advocate sexual violence. None of them care about the fact that the bulk of the deaths are children. They don't give a damn about the femicide that is going on there, the death to Palestinian women that's going on, and elderly people.


And not to mention, of course, the men. But at a deeper level, this is a byproduct of a broader pattern in the way we view war, Daniel, globally. I mean, war is seen under the current conceptualization and under the current legal order as legitimate only within the parameters that were set by this international system, which favors imperial powers and dominant states.


My mentor, Professor Karma Nabulsi at Oxford University, she's now retired, but she's an incredible scholar of the laws of war. She basically tracked the emergence of this. And she said, there's always been like three different traditions of war.


One was that of those that want to eliminate weaker peoples. It's the empire's unleashed. You know, and that can be expressed in, it's called, you can call it a martialist tradition.And you have a second one, which is one that is predominating now, drawing on the theories of people like Grotius and others, a Grotian tradition. It's about basically creating a balance between imperial powers, but it still focuses on formal armies as having rights to fight. There is a regulation of the fighting there, but it's seen also as legitimate.


To be a soldier in uniform is legitimate, which means that you have to be a soldier of a state. In the general public's mindset, that's the way they view legitimacy of war. But there's always been a third tradition, a Republican one, that came out of liberation movements, and that was theorized by people like Rousseau and Kosciuszko and others. Of course, all the great third world leaders, which emphasized popular sovereignty, and emphasized the armies of liberation, as opposed to the armies of states and empires, as legitimate. Unfortunately, since the war on terror, a lot of the gains that were made by national liberation movements in explaining that to the world have disappeared. And now we live in a world where, again, you can have a whole operation like the Israeli military, in which American citizens donate material to.


And nobody says a word. And you have a Palestinian population that is expected to stay silent, stay oppressed, do nothing, as it is being genocided and killed and eliminated, okay, and all in the name of what, security for the settler colonists.


Daniel: We also have to place this genocide into the longer history that we detailed in Thawra, a history of an era when so many political forces tried to unite the Arab East against Western imperialism and Zionism. It's absolutely breathtaking how different things are now than just half a century ago. Egypt, the country once ruled by Nasser, is today actively complicit in a Zionist genocide right next door in Gaza, and Syria and Iraq are wrecked.


Abed: Yes, I mean, the destruction of the Arab state system and the Arab security system, its total collapse under the weight of this imperial onslaught, is definitely what facilitated the Gaza genocide. Because it meant, again, that there is no capacity to place limits on this settler colonial project as it inflicts violence on the natives in that small territory. And this is quite incredible, Daniel, because it's years and years and years of American imperial wars and intervention that resulted in this. It's also the nightmare scenario that Arab political movements were fighting against in the early years of independence. Remember, we started this series by describing how some of the biggest fights, the post-independence period, were around questions of alignment. Alignment means, are you going to be a lackey?


Are you going to be a follower? Are you going to be a poodle in the service of a much bigger power like the United States? Which means that you're expected to stay silent and be inactive when it chooses to impose a certain policy.


That was a big battle. The Baghdad Pact was the biggest example of that. The battle over the Baghdad Pact.


The battle over military treaties that were imposed by Britain on all of these states that were seeking to gain independence. The battle against the idea of limiting independence through economic and military and political agreements. With powers that are far more capable of imposing their will on you than one could imagine. So there had always been a strong attempt to resist that. And that attempt for a while achieved huge gains. Even the Gulf region did not have American military bases for a couple of decades after British withdrawal.


It was a very limited American presence. They did have some bases, but not many. Why?


Because there had been this wave that came in and established a principle that this will affect your legitimacy as a regime if you start getting too close to the imperial agenda. Unfortunately, this decayed over the years. All of the efforts that were put by Naser, Qasem, and others, efforts have focused on questions of sovereignty.


Although they initially came into fruition, they eventually were reversed. Sometimes through direct invasions and wars and regime change. Sometimes through enticements as a result of ideological changes internally within the states, in question, like Egypt, for example, under Sadat.


And all of this meant that this re-formulated regional map is not well equipped to deal with something like Gaza. Now, I'll tell you something. No Arab state wants this.


Take Jordan, for example. It's very close to the West. It's very close to the Americans.It's not happy with what's going on though. It has major implications for the state itself, for their ruling family, and could be disastrous for them. But in addition to that, they're also human beings, and they live in the region.


They see this. Nobody can be happy with this. It's unbelievable.


In the West, by the way, even socialists and progressives are not subjected to the same images. They don't see what's going on in the same way. If you're in the Arab world, you see it.


It's broadcast live 24-7. You know what's going on. So it's very painful.


But even in a place like Jordan, at the moment, they're enforcing, of course, complete control over the border. By either protecting Israel's eastern front completely. Egypt is having its own sovereignty violated.


This Israeli control of these border encroaches is against peace agreements with Egypt. It's breaking every tenet of Egyptian sovereignty. It's threatening Egyptian national security, and still they're not moving.


Why those states are tied to the US.? If they challenge this policy in any substantial way, they will lose income, at the very least. Income that's important for the military.Most of the income, by the way, in those states, is targeted towards the military. The US support goes straight to the military, which means that it goes to the institution that is most important for the perpetuation of the existing ruling order in each one of these states. Secondly, they will be subjected to regional pressures from other US states, U.S.-dominated states.


Much of their financing in the capital they derive comes from Gulf capital, which is tied to this overall structure. The increasing power of Gulf capital is a well studied theme in the literature. My good friend, Adam Ani, has written about it.


There's enormous amounts of literature on it, and its implications are huge. You see the situation where even within the Gulf states, they're also under pressure. They have a social base that does not like the genocide.


They even have royal family members that are not happy with the genocide in a place like Saudi Arabia. Don't think that everyone is cheering, but there is this general American formula that has been imposed, which says, put Palestine on the side. Don't focus on that.It's an issue that's way above your rank. You don't get to talk about issues like this. This is for our congressmen and senators and political establishment.


That's where the decisions are made. And unfortunately, the decision has always been to facilitate and implement this project. So this American control over the region is a prerequisite for the genocide.


Without it, would it not have happened. It could not have happened.


Daniel: I want to talk about the centrality of Palestine over time and also today, regionally and internationally. What we saw half a century ago and what we're still seeing today is on the one hand that reactionary and imperialist forces want to isolate Palestine and liquidate the Palestinian cause while radical forces, liberatory forces insist that Palestinian freedom is in fact a central question for the region and also for the world. Why was the Palestinian question so central in the way that it was for this whole history we told, and then why does it remain so today, even as the politics of the world and the region have changed so dramatically.In the region, of course, in terms of the focus of our work here, as we've described many times, the religiously oriented axis of resistance, it's eclipsed this era, dominated by groups that were secular, nationalist, often socialist, and yet constantly the Palestinian struggle remains central for progressive forces, and its liquidation remains a top priority for imperialists and reactionaries everywhere.


Abed: Every region in the world has had some Palestine in it. Latin America had the Cuban Revolution. It was a locomotive of thought, action, for many years, inspired a lot of people and produced a lot of counter reactions and actions and so on.


Similarly in Southern Africa, South African cause inspired people for decades, and of course, there were all sorts of struggles around it. Angolan one, Namibian, but you have these central causes that because of their scale and centrality, they produce enormous effects in the regions surrounding them. Vietnam and East Asia played a disproportionate role in mobilizing people in that region and across the world.So you have, first of all, all certain causes like this that play major and important roles. Secondly, and more specifically to the Arab region, we've had many causes relating to the struggles against the empire. Almost the whole region has struggled against the empire and it still does.


But when it comes to colonialism and settler colonialism specifically, that was witnessed in Algeria and it was witnessed in Palestine in the most significant ways. The settler colonial struggles have always mobilized people at a much more profound way and they were always seen as having, you know, the special features to them, an existential dimension to them. In Algeria, people mobilized across the Arab world precisely because they felt that there could be an eradication of Arab culture, their Arab identity, and Islamic identity and culture as well, more broadly.In Palestine, it's the same, but it's even deeper than that, in the sense that there were very strong historic connections between Palestine and some major and important Arab states, those that are surrounding it. Its geographic location, as put it at the intersection of Asia and Africa, its geographic location has meant that it's tied to Egypt very strongly, and even more so, that it's very tied to all of Bilad al-Sham, Greater Syria, of which it is an important part. It is the southern part of Bilad al-Sham.


Socially, its population was connected to that region, politically, economically. It was integrated, and we're talking here family ties, and we're talking here trade, and we're talking here accumulated history. There's also a history of migration to other parts of the Arab world.


Palestinians played a big role in building the current Gulf states. There were large Palestinian populations in Saudi Arabia, in Kuwait, after the Nakba especially. The dispersal of the Palestinian people meant that their experience, the horrors that they went through, were replayed through this dispersal.There is another important issue when it comes to looking at it from the Arab level. By the way, there's the Arab level, there's the Islamic level, there's the global level. All of them are important here.


And there's the Afro-Asian level as well. So another important dimension when it came to the Arab level is, this was a cause in which different Arab states had to fight, organize wars. There is no cause that has involved as many wars involving Arab states.


Why is that the case, Daniel? Because the imperial powers, by creating a settler colony in the middle of this Arab region, they destabilized the whole region. They forced basically the involvement of everyone.


You know, there were volunteers in the 1936 revolt in Palestine that were sent. There were volunteers, but also formal armies that entered in 48. Israelis then attacked in 56, and there were, there was 67, there was 73, and there was the invasion of Beirut in 82, and then there was the occupation of southern Lebanon, and the occupation of the Golan, occupation of Sinai, occupation of Jordanian territory.This involved everyone. So this is all very central. It affected the history of development in the region.


Imagine all the resources that went into fighting, the setting up of the settler colony, and defending against its aggression regionally. So all of this has to be taken into account on the Arab level. Now, on the Islamic level, there's a religious significance.


You know, it's also on the Christian level, there's a religious significance. But on the Islamic level, this was, it's very clear that this is a holy land, has major Islamic sites. It has always been important for Muslims in Pakistan, in India, in Indonesia, in Malaysia, across the world, in Nigeria.


So it has big implications globally. And in the same way that you had Christian Zionists, for example, supporting the colonization of Palestine, you also had Christian denominations that were very concerned about it, because they saw it also as a threat to Christian life, which had been well protected in the years before and had the Christian sites. They exist there.


They've always existed there. Churches there are very powerful. They have enormous amounts of land.It's all under threat by this project now. So this religious significance always means that Palestine will be on the map, and we should never forget it. It's part of both the colonizer equation and the equation on the part of the colonized.


Sometimes the left, by the way, dismisses this, does not think enough about it. I really think people should focus on it because this dimension makes it different than your typical also settler colonial case. Palestine is extremely important for Islam, for Christianity and for Judaism.


It is not a religious conflict, but some of the mobilization of ideologies that could be used in relation to it can take religious forms and do. Then you have, furthermore, the global impact. The Afro-Asian dimension to this is essential, and this has to do with the Palestinian people struggle.


This is the people that has been in struggle for over 100 years now. Over the course of these 100 years, it has built intimate connections with liberation movements across the world. This is a process of accumulation, Daniel.It doesn't just happen in a day and night. For people, for struggle to become prominent, people need to know about it, learn about it, engage with it, interact with it, and then develop linkages with it. It's a two-way process.


But with time, during the period of British occupation, Palestine was able to build a bunch of linkages in the Arab arena, in the Muslim arena, international arena. Those linkages expanded in the high age of anti-colonialism, partly with the help of Arab revolutionary states like Egypt and Algeria, but actually also through a system of sisterhood with other national liberation movements that were active at the time. So we had a very strong set of relations between the PLO and the ANC, for example.


And that had to do with fighting in the UN over certain laws, changing the laws of war. It had to do with developing solidarity structures. There were strong linkages with Zimbabwe.


There were strong linkages with Nicaragua and the Sandinistas. You know, it's all these Palestinian pilots that flew the Sandinista helicopters in Nicaragua. They didn't have enough.There were so many different linkages with other liberation struggles across the world. Cuba, Angola. The list goes on.


All of that meant that you had years of investment in building these relationships. And they were all based on a certain way of viewing the world, which is this idea of unity and struggle. And I want to emphasize this idea.


And I think here I'm going to draw on the wonderful Robin Kelly here. Because Robin, he was actually in a commentary in The Guardian on the website that I produced with Karma over the Palestinian Revolution. He said, he's trying to grapple with this, how did we move in the world of solidarity from a conception based on the unity and struggle to one based on a victim.And to be honest with you, if you really want to understand Palestine, if you really want to be in solidarity with Palestine, or with any other cause of national liberation, the idea of unity and struggle is so much more powerful than this notion that, oh, we identify in terms of commonality of victim. You know, so this was a very powerful idea. United people, there were solidarity movements, there was a system, a global system, for understanding, conceptualizing, and practicing solidarity that came out of the national liberation movement world, and Palestine was central to it.


Now, in the new era, Palestine is gaining a new centrality in the West. This is a different process than that that happened in Afro-Asian settings and in tri-continental settings. Because in the West, it's not a world where anti-colonialism is automatically validated, quite the opposite.


So it's difficult to explain the Palestinian cause. And also, the West was usually the place where there was a heavy investment in supporting settler colonialism in Palestine, ideological, material, et cetera. But there was no way to keep Palestine hidden in the West.Palestine affects different sectors of the West in substantial ways. It affects progressives in the West who know that Western imperialism has been focused on the Middle East for a long time now and has been focused particularly on Palestine. So there's a level of complicity in what's going on there between the governments of citizens, here in this country especially, in the United States.


The complicity is unbelievable. It's not just complicity, it's more than that. It's actual complete backing and support.


So in this setting, a cause like this, when you know that your tax dollars are going towards an elimination of the people, well, of course it's going to be important. Jewish communities are important. Because for the longest time, Zionists had kind of achieved a certain level of hegemony within North American Jewish communities.


That was not historically the case, by the way. It took them a long time to do that. And it's really a post-World War II phenomena, this full hegemony.But since they've achieved that hegemony, they've been speaking in the name of all Jews to justify these crimes. And nowadays, these younger generations are rejecting that. They're saying, well, wait a second, this doesn't accord actually with the overall values that most Jews grew up with.


Certainly does not accord with the visions of young people today who want to live in a world where there's freedom and liberation and do not want to have oppression practice in their name. That's the change that's happening. It's mobilizing new sectors towards the Palestinian cause and we're seeing it growing.


There's also another change that's happening, which is a growth of anti-colonial consciousness in the West amongst progressive movements. And here, this is a result of the hard work by Native Americans for many years, by African American movements for many years, and by different Latinx communities for many years that have alerted the United States population to the realities of colonialism that have affected their homelands and that have affected their communities for centuries. Without that anti-colonial consciousness, you can't translate or explain something like Palestine.You will never convince a racist that this is a just cause. But you can convince an audience that has become to understand that colonialism is not a good thing, that, look, what's happening in Palestine is wrong. And we're seeing the growth of this movement.


And I think that it's only going to grow with time, especially because we have an additional factor, which is, there's more Palestinians now than ever in places like the United States and Europe. There are more Arab communities, there are more Muslim communities, there are more communities from Africa and Asia, Latin America that come with very different ideas about what Palestine is and what the future there should look like.


Daniel: We should connect the struggle in Palestine to the larger world of Arab and regional politics, a story we've been telling for pretty much this entire series. Since October 7th, we've seen the Houthis in Yemen, Ansarallah, and Hezbollah in Lebanon, both part of the Iran-backed Axis of Resistance.


We've seen them open up solidarity fronts against Israel, demanding an end to the genocide in Gaza. In recent weeks, Israel has pushed the region into a radically more intense state of armed conflict, assassinating Hamas leader Ismail Haniah in Tehran, and then, most recently, waging an overwhelming war against Hezbollah, massacring huge numbers of Lebanese civilians, and systematically taking out key Hezbollah leadership, including, quite dramatically, Hassan Nasrallah. Finally, this prompted a carefully calibrated, highly restrained second Iranian missile attack on Israel.


Who knows what's happened since we are recording these words? Much, no doubt, has. Anyhow, it's long been clear, beyond clear, that Israel is attempting to drag the US into a regional war with Iran, and that Israel has zero intention of pursuing any sort of ceasefire in Gaza or anywhere.And it's also clear that Netanyahu prefers that Donald Trump win the US presidential election, and even though Biden, simultaneously increasingly senile and resolutely Zionist, even as Biden lays down no substantive red lines at all for the U.S.'s murderously belligerent ally. Explain this regional dimension of the Gaza genocide, and in terms of what it means that Ansar Allah and Hezbollah opened these solidarity fronts with Gaza over the past year, and then more recently, that Israel has gone on this expansionist offensive, dealing Hezbollah these giant blows, attempting to draw Iran into full-scale war, and promising to create a so-called new order for the Middle East.


Abed: Daniel, this brings us back actually to the Iranian Revolution and the post-revolutionary phase. And it's very important to note that one of the main agendas of the Iranian Revolution, certainly on the foreign policy level, was support for the Palestinian cause. And the other principle agenda was the regaining of Iranian sovereignty from what was seen as American imperial encroachment into Iran's affairs.The question of sovereignty in relation to the US continues to haunt Iran and it was an important part of its overall outlook. In order to achieve the maximum amount of independence possible, Iran needed to consolidate its regional position. It needed to also create a defensive strategy in order to protect its own borders from attacks that were, you know, imminent.


The US officials talk regularly about the possibility of hitting Iran. You have officials demanding war on Iran on a regular basis. You have elected figures in Congress, in the Senate, and elsewhere speaking in strong, warmongering language in relation to that country.


Of course, then you have also the regional bully, Israel, which is a settler-colonial state that as we've seen throughout Thawra, has aggressively threatened its neighbors from day one. It has also been threatening to attack Iran for a very, very long time. Now, they are willing to stop threatening Iran if Iran withdraws from the attempt to create a regional balance of power with the Israelis.And a regional balance of power involves a variety of things. It involves nuclear deterrence, because the Israelis have immense nuclear capacity. Nobody talks about that.


That's a major threat for the Iranians. So they've been pursuing that option. They're willing to moderate their position in relation to the acquisition of a nuclear weapon, but they need guarantees for their national security around that.


Also, they needed a lift for the sanctions on them for that to happen. So it's a complicated story. It's often portrayed as a story of a belligerent Iran expanding.


The actual reality is more of a state that had established a new revolutionary structure in the region, an Islamic revolutionary structure in this case, that has had to go on the defensive in relation to the imperial power that had formerly controlled its boundaries and in relation to the settler-colonial state that used to have a good relationship with Iran when it was within their realm of American control. So in order to balance, you have the nuclear dimension. Also, you have another dimension, which is having regional allies.That was a quest that the Iranians have embarked on from day one. The map of the alliances follows a demographic sectarian trends in the region. There's no doubt about it.


I mean, with the exception of Palestinian groups that have allied with Iran, almost all of the alliances were with areas with the Shia presence or in which non-Sunni groups were in rule, which is the case of Syria. But the sectarian analysis does not suffice here. It's not enough.


Because Syria, for example, yes, the president is an Alawi figure, and much of the security establishment belongs to that sect. But Syria's alliance with Iran also had to do with its fight with Iraq in the context of the internal ba’ath struggles that we spoke about earlier in Thawra. And, you know, it became, with the years, a very strong alliance.


It had to do also with Syria's situation with Israel. It needed a reliable alliance in the face of that. It had to do with changes within Syria itself.The Iranian role there grew, but now you can argue that it's no longer just an alliance. You can say that Syria is a sphere of influence for Iran because of the key role that it played in maintaining the government there and the regime there in the face of a major popular uprising and later on a geopolitical civil war that was waged on Syria's soil. So all of this is to say that Iran has a regional presence.


In Iraq, it expanded its regional presence after the American invasion, ironically. The American invasion through sectarianizing the Iraqi space and through bringing back Iranian sponsored political parties into the arena, it facilitated the entry of Iran strongly into the Iraqi arena. And there, it also sponsored groups that were allied to it.But the earliest regional presence that Iran had outside was of course in Lebanon. And there, the relationship goes back to even before the Islamic Republic was founded, when you had of course Imam al-Sadr taking charge of an important Shia role in Lebanon, and of course through that, establishing Harakat al-Mahroomin, the movement of the dispossessed or the deprived, and then later on establishing the Amal movement. Now, of course, as we mentioned earlier in Thawra, that movement, especially after the disappearance of Sadr, did not necessarily have always the best relationship with the Islamic Republic, and the Islamic Republic needed to establish an alternative that was much more in line with its overall ideology and theology, and they created Hezbollah.


They sponsored the creation of Hezbollah, which was not only purely the product of Iranian creation, but also had to do with local youth being attracted to the ideology of the Iranian Revolution, and the ideology of the jurists that Khomeini was promoting. So, if we look then at Lebanon, you have this old relationship that led to the establishment of Hezbollah. In the context of Israeli invasion of Lebanon, I should emphasize.So, it's not a coincidence that you have this conflictual relationship between the settler colonial Israeli state and Hezbollah. Hezbollah was established specifically as a resistance organization that sought to drive the Israeli occupying army out of Lebanon. And this is an important point to emphasize, Daniel, because sometimes people, when they speak of the axis of resistance, when they speak of Hezbollah, they forget.


It's called the axis of resistance for a reason. It's because it's resisting an invading force, an invading force of the Israeli state, and of course, the overall project that enables that force to invade and carry out what it does regionally, which is the force of American empire in the region, which has bases and installations and fleets in every regional corner you can think of. So it's very much conceived as a defensive mechanism against this really, really aggressive set of forces that are operating in the region today.Yemen is the latest addition to this, and that has to do, of course, with what has started off as an insurgency in Yemen that had lasted for many years before in the region of Sa’ada. It was a regionalized insurgency. Abdul Malik al-Houthi and his followers were the key players in it.


Now, later on in the context of the aftermath of the Arab Spring, they take control over the northern part of the country, and of course, over the course of the insurgency, they gravitate closer and closer to Iran. That's again a non-Sunni group, but it's a non-Sunni group that was not traditionally seen as, you know, classic Ja'afari 12 Imam al-Shi'ite. So it's not theologically wasn't traditionally close to Iran.


These are Zayidi Muslims in Yemen, certainly in the north part, the majority belong to that sect. And that's quite different than Ja'afari 12 Imam al-Shi'ites. However, they did receive backing from Iran for a long time, they did receive support from it, and that relationship developed with the years, and it became stronger and stronger.The axis, it should be noted, is not, although it might have started in relation to the Israeli state in some ways, but it also had to do with Iran's other regional competitors. And these were almost always allied to the United States. You know, even Iraq, when it was in competition with Iranian state during the Iraq-Iran war, it had, of course, some elements of strong US backing, as we've mentioned in previous episodes.


So that's part of the struggle, but although the US relationship is one element of this equation, it's not the only one. It should be noted that, you know, Iran has a set of contradictions with Saudi Arabia, that would have existed, whether or not there was a US role. It had a set of contradictions with Iraq, that would have existed, whether or not there was a US role.However, the US role helps shape the nature of these contradictions and leads to the specific outcomes that we see today, given its special relationship with these states, especially in Saudi Arabia. So, when we're reading this map, what we've seen is not only that you've had this axis of resistance develop, but that you also had the development of another axis opposed to it, an axis that sought to bring together the settler colonial state, Israel, with American imperial-backed regimes in Saudi Arabia and the Emirates and Bahrain and elsewhere, into some kind of an alliance. That's been the agenda of American governments for a long time, as we know.


It doesn't only have to do with Iran. It has more to do with Israel. However, it has major implications for Iran, because these are all states that have at some point or another declared enmity towards Iran and sought to bring down the regime.At the moment, in recent years, there has been an attempt on the part of Saudi Arabia, of course, to reduce the temperature with Iran and to allow for some elements of normalization between the two countries. So the intensity of the regional clashes between them has subsided. However, we still see that there is a very strong Israeli push to restore that regional enmity towards Iran and to bring it down.


So this is the back story, Daniel. Now, for the longest time, from the Iraq War onwards, the axis of resistance was growing. It was on the up.


You had major expansion in Iran's role in Iraq. You had the ability of Iran to defend the regime in Syria, which, of course, by the way, reduced the prestige of that axis of resistance in many Arab countries, many Sunni-majority Arab countries, because it was seen as suppressing a Sunni-majority in Syria. However, you know, in geopolitical terms, it was a success for Iran, despite the reduction of its prestige at that particular stage.You know, then you had also a series of successes in Lebanon in 2000, when Hezbollah liberated the Lebanese south from Israeli occupation forces in 2006, when it was able to defend against a major Israeli onslaught and was able to push it back. So, these were seen as major successes. But you also had difficulties.


One difficulty was with the Palestinian component of that axis. You have two movements that have had strong relations with Iran, historically, Islamic Jihad, which of course was formed as a response to the Iranian Revolution and always viewed itself as being close to it. But more importantly, of course, is Hamas, which is more distant from Iran ideologically.


However, it found itself in a position where it had to seek Iranian support over the years because the Arab regimes in their current configuration will not give any support for armed struggle in Palestine. So, Iran was the only door, the Iranian door was the only one that Hamas could knock at for that kind of support. There were tensions, as I mentioned, over Syria.So, Hamas and Iran fought on opposite sides in Syria, and that led to serious cleavage between them. However, the end of the civil war in Syria, or it hasn't fully ended yet, but the end of it in most of Syria, and the survival of the regime there, meant that Hamas had to re-calibrate and re-engage with Iran, because in Palestine, the situation was becoming increasingly intolerable. They re-built their relationship.


They have strong common interests. They certainly have a common enemy that threatens both the Palestinian people, but also the Iranian state on a regular basis. And essentially, that meant that Hamas could draw on Iranian technology, on Iranian support and training in various ways.And of course, it could also draw on political support, which is urgently needed for a group like that, because the Western governments followed the policy that was set by Henry Kissinger since the 1970s of essentially ensuring that any Palestinian group that does not follow their instructions will not be given a seat at the table. So this applies to Hamas. And of course, it's easy for it to be applied to Hamas in the era of the war on terror, because any group that calls itself Islamic can be easily just dismissed as a terrorist group even if it has spent many years not engaging in any operation that could be described as a terrorist.


So that was the situation that Hamas was facing. And that meant that it had a strategic interest in having a strong relationship with Tehran. And that relationship of course became stronger and stronger as the Gaza branch of Hamas became stronger and especially as Yahya Sanwar began to take a more leading role in that.In the Khalid Mish'al days, he had made the decision to support the revolution in Syria. But since Hamas reorganizes leadership structures following the Arab Spring and following the failure in Syria and other countries, there's now in the Hamas leadership figures that could develop a stronger relationship with Iran and they did. With October 7, I strongly believe that Iran had no idea that it was going to happen.


Not on the scale that it did, and that's a belief that many Palestinian analysts and commentators share. Of course, we will never know the full truth until the documents around and the oral histories are available and all of that. But there's a lot of evidence that seems to suggest that that is the case.


However, it's definitely meant, the occurrence of that event definitely meant that Iran had to take a stance against the genocidal onslaught that came after it. Because taking out one major component of the Axis of Resistance, Hamas, would have meant that the other components would fall. The Israelis, you know, had they finished the job in Gaza, they would have proceeded to attack the other Iranian supported organizations in the region.And their aggression is difficult to predict, the extent of their aggression. And as we have seen, this is a state that is armed to the teeth and that has enormous backing from the United States. So the Iranians had to make sure that they were supportive of the resistance in Gaza.


But at the same time, they were playing a very delicate game. Because they were afraid of the consequences of full support for Gaza. And by full support, I mean like launching, for example, a regional war to end the genocide.


I believe that their assessment was that they were incapable of carrying out a successful war of that kind. Certainly, they opted for something else, which is a war of attrition. So Hezbollah, at least, carried out the biggest aspect of that war of attrition.


You know, it launched low intensity operations in the northern part of historic Palestine that is controlled by the Israeli state. That led to the displacement of tens of thousands of Israeli colonists from that area. It put pressure on the whole system.It disrupted everyday life in the Israeli state. And remember, this is a state that was used to either short-term wars in which daily life would be disrupted for a little bit, but not for a long time, or situations where there would be no disruption anyways. So there was no social cost to any political or military offensive that was carried out by the Israelis historically, or the social cost was lower than it could be because of the lack of disruption to everyday life.


What the Axis of Resistance strategy has done is that it has created a situation of attrition in which there is a disruption. Flights are disrupted, the ability of people to inhabit certain areas are disrupted, regular entry into shelters, and so on. All of that harms business as well.


There has been a decline in investments, there has been economic instability. So they're trying to make the situation in the Israeli state unsustainable. They're sending a signal that unless you stop the genocide, they're not sending a signal, they're actually saying very clearly, unless you stop the genocide, this will continue.So if there was a ceasefire, and Hassan Nasrallah before his assassination, I'd said that on numerous occasions, you know, that should there be a ceasefire in Gazah, should the genocidal onslaught there stop, then, you know, there would be a suspension of this policy. That has not happened, of course. The genocidal onslaught has been going on now for a full year.


So we can see very clearly that the axis of resistance has been resisting it, but it has been resisting it with incredible restraint. And sometimes it gets actually critiqued for the lack of a stronger response. I actually don't think that they have the capacity, again, to do a stronger response, because what that would mean would, that would mean the American entry into the war, and it would compromise Lebanon.


It could be an American invasion. There could be American attacks on Iran in a severe way. Things could go out of hand.Now, again, it's not likely that Iran would be invaded, because any invading force would be absolutely meant to go into Iran. You never know with the American policy makers, but sometimes they have done mad adventures of that sort, but they would pay dearly in Iran, and I think that's why they haven't done that so far. There's also risk to them when it comes to the neighboring Gulf States.


There would be a serious, serious disruption of global capitalism should there be a major attack on Iran of that sort. Already we've seen that Iran could project power through the axis of resistance when it came to global shipping. Much of it has been diverted, which raises costs.


When you have control over Bab al-Mindab, and that passageway connects basically the Red Sea with the Indian Ocean and leads of course to the Suez Canal, which connects with the Mediterranean. You can do a lot of damage with that, but it would be not even comparable to the sort of damage that could happen should there be an attack on Iran. Because that would mean that Iran could attack oil fields in all the Gulf states.Those are easy to attack. It could even disrupt daily life in those Gulf states. All what you'd need to do from strategic standpoint is attack, for example, desalination plants.


Then you would have no water in Dubai and other major cities there. These are considerations that the Americans are fully aware of. Nevertheless, the Iranians are aware that should there be a major confrontation of the Israeli state on a much higher level than now, there could be a direct American involvement.


That involvement could take place even if it's clear to American military planners that they might lose a lot. Because it will be based on domestic political calculations in the United States. So these are all issues that play into Iran's specific role in relation to this genocide.What we can say is that Iran's role has rejuvenated its base in the region. Despite the fact that, again, a lot of people are criticizing it for not doing enough, you have others saying, well, it's actually the only state that's doing anything. The rest are either complicit with the Israeli genocide, or they make verbal protestations without any concrete interventions that could stop it.


Here, the old maxim that I've said on multiple occasions here on Thawra, which is that Americanization equals Israelization in this part of the world holds true. The only reason why Iran is able to take this kind of stance in this region is that it is not within the American orbit. Now, when it comes to the Iranian role and the Israeli attempt to take that role, to basically transform that role from one that is restrained in responding to the genocide to one that solicits war, essentially, or one that would lead to war, the Israelis have been trying to drag Iran over and over again through multiple, serious assaults on the country and its national security and on the entire regional order.And they've used a method that they have long used, actually, in their history. It's a method that is, of course, illegal and international law, but they don't care about that, and neither does the US., which is political assassinations and transnational political assassinations.


So they've assassinated Ismail Haniyeh in Tehran on the day of the inauguration of the new president in Iran. This is like a major act of international terrorism, of course, but it was also trying to drag Iran into a serious confrontation because you can't get a breach bigger than this and an assault bigger than this to assassinate a major leader in a capital of a country during the inauguration of its president, of its new president. This is a big deal.


Then they've launched the pager attacks in Hezbollah. This was trying to drag Hezbollah into the war, into a much bigger confrontation. And they did that through an act of mass terrorism in this case, not political assassination, but mass terrorism.They put bombs in thousands of pagers that will explode in numerous households, in numerous civilian areas. A lot of the people that were killed or maimed by that horrendous and heinous attack were children and families of ordinary citizens. And it was absolutely horrendous.


I should note here, by the way, they often say, oh, well, it's Hezbollah fighters, therefore it's justified, or these pagers are owned by Hezbollah people. First of all, their families are protected under international law. Secondly, when you're not in uniform, you're noncombatant.


So this whole mythology that somehow makes it okay. Can you imagine? By this logic, by the way, it would be okay to kill all Israelis indiscriminately because, you know, they serve in the Israeli army.


But of course, the logic is ridiculous when you're wearing uniform, you're combatant. When you're not wearing a uniform, you're noncombatant. So this is a situation that breaks all norms and laws.And it led to enormous loss of life, and it was absolutely terrible. But they didn't stop at that. They kept on bombarding, kept on attacking, and they've taken it to the next level by throwing these enormous bombs, these bunker buster bombs, that led to the assassination of Sayyid Hassan Nasrallah, and of course, before him, there were multiple leaders in Hezbollah that were assassinated.


So what this shows us is a serious Israeli attempt to again, drag Iran and the whole axis into a major war. And now with their attempts at initiating an invasion of Lebanon, with the regular bombardment of the country, with them paving the way for such an invasion discursively and politically within the United States, it could be a disastrous scenario where the war does expand. That will be a horrible situation for the people of the region.


It already is. I mean, the people in Lebanon are paying a heavy price. Netanyahu thinks that he can have political survival through that.His right wing believes in this project. And now, the whole of the Israeli public, left and right, are mobilized behind this. In a way, these assaults on Iran and the axis of resistance, and especially on Hezbollah, have given him a lot of political credit.


You know, and they've allowed them to regain popularity in the Israeli street, because that street, as we've mentioned over and over again in Thawra, there is no real left there. What you have is a settler-colonial type of left, which is not a genuine left. So when it comes to settler-colonial objectives, they tend to unify with the mainstream Zionists or the right wing Zionists.


A lot of this is based on illusion, though, Daniel. Because when you look at this idea, right after Hassan Nasrallah's assassination, they thought that they can do whatever they want in the region. For a couple of days at least, there was this thinking that that's it.


Hezbollah is gone, Iran is gone, they can just go. And of course, that is an illusion. Iran has a lot of strength to it, despite the fact that it is on the defensive.But it is not a weak state. Should there be a ground invasion there, it would fail. Its capacity at rocket launching is strong.


Same goes for Hezbollah. It is a well-organized, well-trained group. And even if you take out higher echelons of the leadership, it can still mount a very strong guerrilla warfare, as we've seen now in the early days of the Israeli invasion of Lebanese territory that we've been witnessing.


So Hezbollah has been able to give them serious hits. Iran has been showing that it can restore a sense of deterrence with its major rocket attack that it launched this time. This was, of course, the second one it launched, but this one was far more effective, because it launched rockets that had higher speeds and that were much more effective at hitting their targets.


They're sending a signal, we could go further. You know, this was just round two, we could have round three, we could have round four, and it could hit more serious targets than that. One thing to note is that unlike the Israeli strikes, which tend to hit civilians, they were focusing on military and infrastructural damage. The Israelis and the Americans keep boasting, oh, we successfully repelled this attack, look at the casualty count. Well, the Iranians have said from the very beginning that they don't intend to cause major civilian casualties with this. They want to degrade the military and infrastructural capacities of the Israeli settler-colonial state with this.


So, it's a developing situation, Daniel. We can't tell where it's going to end, but I'll tell you something, unless this genocide ends, the whole region will be entrapped in this disastrous situation. And to be honest with you, unless genuine decolonization takes place, and a major anti-colonial success against the Israeli state takes place, that state has to transform.


It has to cease to be driven by Zionism and its settler-colonial aspirations. It has to develop into a democratic project that includes everyone on the land, and that means the return of the Palestinian refugees. It means the liberation of all the Palestinian occupied territories.It means full equality for the Palestinian citizens of Israel. It means also a situation in which Jews are ultimately not superior to Palestinian Arabs in that land. So only through equality can we cease to have these regional tensions that we're seeing today.


Daniel: Stepping back, Abed, to ask you my very last Thawra question ever. Not my last question to you ever, because you will certainly be back on the dig, but the last question for this series that it's been such an incredible honor to make with you. And I want to end by just emphasizing first just how extraordinary it is to take in just the level of violence and disorder that Western imperialism has unleashed and imposed upon the Middle East, on the Arab East, and how that violence just constantly, persistently continues through the present moment, thinking about Gaza, of course, and the rest of Palestine, reflecting upon what Syria and Iraq once were, these spectacularly diverse, richly complex societies, and what constant imperialist violence has done to those countries today.I could go on and on, and yet resistance continues. So to close, what remains of the more secular left nationalist politics across the Arab East that we dedicated this series to telling the stories of? Is there any path you see for its more robust revival?


In recent years, we've seen huge youth-led protests against sectarianism and sect-based government in both Lebanon and Iraq. Prior to that, of course, we heard loud echoes of the Arab Revolutionary era on the streets of the Arab Spring. Do you see a rationale for hope today in Palestine and across the region?


Abed: Daniel, you know me, I'm a very hopeful individual. I'm a less hopeful kind of person, but that's maybe because I've always been engaged in organizing. I don't believe that we should just pontificate and reflect.We should also be involved in trying to change the world around us. In that sense, I'm not just interested in reading the thesis on Feuerbach, but I also want to translate them into practice, and praxis to be more precise. I know it's a strange thing to say in the midst of a genocide, that I have hope, but I do have hope.


I'm inspired by the resilience of our people in Gaza. I'm inspired by the fact that we're standing strong, despite now almost a year of total eradication being inflicted on them. I've been very involved in the efforts of universities in Gaza to resume instruction.


I'm proud to tell you, for example, now that we have over 36,000 students taking online instruction, now in Gaza, through the Gaza University's Emergency Committee, of which I'm a part. And of course, this mobilization on the part of universities is just a microcosm of all the different efforts that are undertaken by people to stay standing and stay strong. And so there's that.Secondly, I don't think we should ever get stuck in the left-wing melancholic tradition, which is not very helpful. Like, what good does it do to come and lament secularism or lament the collapse of the Soviet Union and the parties around it, or to lament the collapse of, you know, non-aligned movements? All of that is not helpful.


Or to lament the weakening of the trade union movements and the labor movement worldwide. It's not enough to lament. We need to think about these things in a sober way, and but also to take action, to reverse that.


Yes, it is very true that at some point in modern Arab history, projects like the Socialist Project were dominant. They had a hegemonic impact. Almost every Republican state claimed socialism as its doctrine, and even monarchical states were under pressure to engage in building a public sector and so on.


It was a very interesting moment in Arab history. It didn't go far enough. People will tell you that this was not real full-on socialism and so on, but it definitely had elements of that, the economic front.It is true that on the political front, there was an organized and very strong effort to expel imperialism from the region to ensure that it would never come back, and to fight its settler colonial manifestations, including in Algeria and in Palestine. In Algeria, that fight was victorious, but at a great cost, over a million lives lost, but also decades of future violence were latent. As a result of the destruction that was caused by colonialism during that fight, and as a result of unresolved questions that were to haunt the country since then.


Sort of questions that Fanon had predicted, of course, in his incredible work, Wretched of the Earth, and on the pitfalls of national consciousness. So there was that going on. There was a fight against settler colonialism.


There was a fight for socialism. There was a strong women's rights movement. All these feminist federations, all the hard work that was put into that.There was a lot going on, and we described all of it, or much of it, during these many hours of conversations between us. But there were problems as well, and the situation cannot be just reduced to, well, there was this great economic and political horizon, and social, political, social and economic horizon opening up, and then suddenly it collapses. There were always contestations.


This was a region in which these questions were not fully resolved, because actually the sovereignty question, on which all political and social and economic matters depend, had not been resolved. It's a region that had not established actually full sovereignty. It was still a site of contestation, where all the empires had left, the new empire was coming in, and then you had this constant push and pull over its place in the region.


And by the new empire, of course, we're referring to the United States. Of course, also the settler colony that's associated with the new empire, the Israeli settler colony, was wreaking havoc as well, and was advocating for a new Middle East. This is the term that they were using, and they continue to use now.One that is dominated by the Israeli state, of course. So this arrangement is no longer there. You have, if you want to be negative and skeptical, you come and say, almost every state in the region now has completely submitted to American power.


You know, there are a few that are out of the American orbit, but they're under a lot of pressure. Syria is out of the American orbit, but it also doesn't do anything to anger the United States. Remember, even the Assad regime had limits in relation to the United States.


And there are still American troops active there. There are still other troops active there. There's Russian troops.


There's no real sovereignty in that country now. There's Iranian troops. I'm not equating between the two, of course, because the US has played a much more aggressive role in this part of the world.


But sovereignty and its lack thereof is the issue here. Now, we look elsewhere, Americans are everywhere. Sovereignty deficit is disastrous.


The neoliberal question is still there. Neoliberalism is pervasive. The Washington Consensus has been invading this region in multiple ways, and it has really affected public services.It has affected every aspect of society. It has led to massive privatization, but also the collapse of the internal social structure. You know, there had never been like a fully developed welfare state, but there were elements of it that were strong, and they were weakened by this neoliberal invasion.


But also you had the collapse with this invasion of national industries. You had the collapse of the capacity at local production. You had the entry into increasingly compredorial sort of relations.


So that has become a problem. And then here, of course, this is not to mention the situation in the petroleum-rich countries. So that's a picture, and you will say, I mean, wait a second, you said you were hopeful.


You've just painted a bleak picture, where you told me that militarily, this region is under American control. Politically, it has no sovereignty. Economically, it's completely run by this horrific, ultra-capitalist reality that does not offer ordinary people a future, and that's created massive disparities.And you can add to that even the fact that there has been a perpetuation of the denial of political rights and civic rights and even basic individual rights, all of this is not there. Even basic liberalism is not there, let alone the sort of full liberator future that a socialist would want to see. So why am I hopeful?


It's because I see these as actually causes to fight for. History is not about just a narrative of, oh, there's this bleak picture or bright picture. History is actually about dynamism.


It's about change. There's always a potential for change. And in Palestine, I look and I see a settler colonial project that is on the defensive, that is turning towards elimination because it lacks confidence in its ability to perpetuate itself forever.


And I think that it will be defeated. I know it will be. It's losing its basis of support internationally.


And that was basically the only reason why it exists. And locally, the cost of what it's doing is rising for its own colonist citizens. That's bound to produce change there.The US is not going to last forever as an empire. And the cost of what it's doing in the Middle East is very high. I don't believe that empires will always be there.


The British, they had their moment in the region. And eventually, they were driven up. I don't think the American movement will last forever.


But there will be counter reactions, and it will be very difficult for them to continue to practice what they're practicing now in the long run. And there will be also movements that will emerge to challenge that. If you read this history and if you observe it very closely, there's always movements that emerge.


When we look at also the monarchical regimes and the neoliberal order, there will also be contestations. We cannot guarantee what the outcomes will be. But this is something that I always say, we have to look at the process, not just the outcome.And if we're going to really, really, really take our belief seriously in a better world, we better practice it. That means mobilizing, organizing. Now, one area that needs development, and one question that actually I would invite Thawra listeners, especially from the region, to think about is the collapse of the modes of organization.


Because we have mobilization now. Sometimes you can get people into the streets in this region. The problem we have is around organization, and around translating that organization into political leadership and change.


The collapse of the radical Arab party is a big problem. You know, and we've discussed extensively the external and internal reasons behind that collapse. But there's something to be learned from that.


Parties were important. They created a sense of political education. They were vehicles for political transformation.They could channel people's energies in an organized way. We need a formula that recaptures some of that without the internal dictatorial dimensions that used to predominate in these parties, with greater democratic orientation within these parties internally, has to be some formula that is geared to that. So that crisis needs to be resolved, and it could open the way for resolving a crisis of also political structures.


So in Palestine, for example, we're in desperate need to reclaim some of the political structures that had been destroyed or weakened by the Oslo Process, including the Palestine Liberation Organization. But in other parts of the region also, people need to reclaim some of the political structures. You know, there's sometimes an idealistic outlook, Daniel, that dismisses all the gains of the past.


We still have a lot of the gains of the past. Without the movements we describe, we would not have had independence, even in its diminished form that we see today. Without these movements, we would not have had many of the rights that were gained in these states, even though they're restricted and many of them have been reversed, but some of them still exist.And there's change happening. On the feminist front, for example, look at how many women now are in the workplace in the region. Look at how many women are in the universities, the colleges, there tend to be the majority, actually.


That's going to produce structural change that we're only going to see in the future. You know, it's not going to be immediately evident now, but it's going to produce changes. Islamic current, it's not going to be dominant forever.


They've already lost some popularity. Sometimes they're going to lose out of internal battles between them and the regimes that have helped prop them up. This is happening now in Saudi Arabia, for example.


The main factor weakening Islamic movements there is actually the ruler, MBS. He might change his mind in the future, but definitely this conflict will lead to, to openings for more secular alternatives. And when it comes to the regimes themselves, they're all on the defensive, Daniel.And we know very well that it's better to organize for change than to just keep on complaining about the nature of these regimes or the imperial powers backing them or the settler colonial state that they are currently silent about. And at the end of the day, I believe in the politics of hope. And I believe in grounding that politics in a very, very thorough historical analysis.


And that's what we were trying to do in this series.


Daniel: Well, Abdel Razzaq Takriti, thank you very, very much for a lot of your time.


Abed: Thank you, Daniel. And I love all what you do. And your commitment to public education is really, really meaningful on so many fronts.


And it's so relevant for many causes, including the Palestinian cause today.


Daniel: And that is the whole series. The final part of our three-part epilogue, Thawra, the DIG series on 20th century Arab politics with Abdel Razzaq Takriti.